By the same author

TOWARDS COLONIAL FREEDOM, 1946
WHAT I MEAN BY POSITIVE ACTION, 1950
GHANA (AUTOBIOGRAPHY), 1957
I SPEAK OF FREEDOM, 1961
AFRICA MUST UNITE, 1963
CONSCIENCISM, 1964

NEO-COLONIALISM

The Last Stage of Imperialism

KWAME NKRUMAH

© by Kwame Nkrumah, 1965
First published in 1965 by Thomas Nelson & Sons, Ltd., London

Published in the United States by
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS CO., INC., 1966
All Rights Reserved

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 66—18026
Printed in the United States of America

This book is dedicated to
the Freedom Fighters of Africa
living and dead

‘The enormous dimensions of finance-capital con-
centrated in a few hands and creating an extremely
extensive network of close ties and relationships which
involves not only the small and medium capitalists, but
also even the very small; this, on the one hand, and on
the other the bitter struggle against other national State
groups of financiers for the partition of the world and
the right to rule over other countries—these two
factors taken together cause the complete conversion
of all the possessing classes to the side of imperialism.
The signs of the times are a “general” enthusiasm
regarding its prospects, a passionate defence of im-
perialism, and every possible camouflage of its real
nature.’—LENIN, Imperialism,
 
Contents

Introduction
1. Africa’s Resources
2. Obstacles to Economic Progress
3. Imperialist Finance
4. Monopoly Capitalism and the American Dollar
5. The Truth behind the Headlines
6. Primary Resources and Foreign Interests
7. The Oppenheimer Empire
8. Foreign Investment in South African Mining
9. Anglo American Corporation Limited
10. The Diamond Groups
11. Mining Interests in Central Africa
12. Companies and Combines
13. The Tin, Aluminium and Nickel Giants
14. Union Miniére du Haut Katanga
15. Economic Pressures in the Congo Republic
16. Monetary Zones and Foreign Banks
17. New Industries: The Effects on Primary Producing Countries
18. The Mechanisms of Neo-Colonialism
Conclusion
Bibliography

Introduction

THE neo-colonialism of today represents imperialism in its final
and perhaps its most dangerous stage. In the past it was possible
to convert a country upon which a neo-colonial regime had
been imposed—Egypt in the nineteenth century is an example
—into a colonial territory. Today this process is no longer
feasible. Old-fashioned colonialism is by no means entirely
abolished. It still constitutes an African problem, but it is
everywhere on the retreat. Once a territory has become
nominally independent it is no longer possible, as it was in the
last century, to reverse the process. Existing colonies may
linger on, but no new colonies will be created. In place of
colonialism as the main instrument of imperialism we have
today neo-colonialism.

The essence of neo-colonialism is that the State which is
subject to it is, in theory, independent and has all the outward
trappings of international sovereignty. In reality its economic
system and thus its political policy is directed from outside.

The methods and form of this direction can take various
shapes. For example, in an extreme case the troops of the
imperial power may garrison the territory of the neo-colonial
State and control the government of it. More often, however,
neo-colonialist control is exercised through economic or
Monetary means. The neo-colonial State may be obliged to
take the manufactured products of the imperialist power to the
exclusion of competing products from elsewhere. Control over
government policy in the neo-colonial State may be secured by
payments towards the cost of running the State, by the pro-
vision of civil servants in positions where they can dictate
policy, and by monetary control over foreign exchange through
the imposition of a banking system controlled by the imperial
power.

Where neo-colonialism exists the power exercising control
is often the State which formerly ruled the territory in question,
but this is not necessarily so. For example, in the case of South
Vietnam the former imperial power was France, but neo-
colonial control of the State has now gone to the United States.
It is possible that neo-coldnial control may be exercised by a
consortium of financial interests which are not specifically
identifiable with any particular State. The control of the Congo
by great international financial concerns is a case in point.

The result of neo-colonialism is that foreign capital is used
for the exploitation rather than for the development of the less
developed parts of the world. Investment under neo-colonialism
increases rather than decreases the gap between the rich and
the poor countries of the world.

The struggle against neo-colonialism is not aimed at exclud-
ing the capital of the developed world from operating in less
developed countries. It is aimed at preventing the financial
power of the developed countries being used in such a way as
to impoverish the less developed.

Non-alignment, as practised by Ghana and many other
countries, is based on co-operation with all States whether they
be capitalist, socialist or have a mixed economy. Such a policy,
therefore, involves foreign investment from capitalist countries,
but it must be invested in accordance with a national plan
drawn up by the government of the non-aligned State with its
own interests in mind. The issue is not what return the foreign
investor receives on his investments. He may, in fact, do better
for himself if he invests in a non-aligned country than if he
invests in a neo-colonial one. The question is one of power.
A State in the grip of neo-colonialism is not master of its own
destiny. It is this factor which makes neo-colonialism such a
serious threat to world peace. The growth of nuclear weapons
has made out of date the old-fashioned balance of power which
rested upon the ultimate sanction of a major war. Certainty of
mutual mass destruction effectively prevents either of the great
power blocs from threatening the other with the possibility of
a world-wide war, and military conflict has thus become con-
fined to ‘limited wars’. For these neo-colonialism is the
breeding ground.

Such wars can, of course, take place in countries which are
not neo-colonialist controlled. Indeed their object may be to
establish in a small but independent country a neo-colonialist
regime. The evil of neo-colonialism is that it prevents the
formation of those large units which would make impossible
‘limited war’. To give one example: if Africa was united, no
major power bloc would attempt to subdue it by limited war
because from the very nature of limited war, what can be
achieved by it is itself limited. It is only where small States
exist that it is possible, by landing a few thousand marines or
by financing a mercenary force, to secure a decisive result.

The restriction of military action of ‘limited wars’ is, how-
ever, no guarantee of world peace and is likely to be the factor
which will ultimately involve the great power blocs in a world
war, however much both are determined to avoid it.

Limited war, once embarked upon, achieves a momentum
of its own. Of this, the war in South Vietnam is only one
example. It escalates despite the desire of the great power blocs
to keep it limited. While this particular war may be prevented
from leading to a world conflict, the multiplication of similar
limited wars can only have one end—world war and the terrible
consequences of nuclear conflict.

Neo-colonialism is also the worst form of imperialism. For
those who practise it, it means power without responsibility
and for those who suffer from it, it means exploitation without
redress. In the days of old-fashioned colonialism, the imperial
Power had at least to explain and justify at home the actions it
Was taking abroad. In the colony those who served the ruling
imperial power could at least look to its protection against any
Violent move by their opponents. With neo-colonialism neither
Is the case.

Above all, neo-colonialism, like colonialism before it, post-
pones the facing of the social issues which will have to be
faced by the fully developed sector of the world before the
danger of world war can be eliminated or the problem of
world poverty resolved.

Neo-colonialism, like colonialism, is an attempt to export
the social conflicts of the capitalist countries. The temporary
success of this policy can be seen in the ever widening gap
between the richer and the poorer nations of the world. But
the internal contradictions and conflicts of neo-colonialism
make it certain that it cannot endure as a permanent world
policy. How it should be brought to an end is a problem that
should be studied, above all, by the developed nations of the
world, because it is they who will feel the full impact of the
ultimate failure. The longer it continues the more certain it 1s
that its inevitable collapse will destroy the social system of
which they have made it a foundation.

The reason for its development in the post-war period can
be briefly summarised. The problem which faced the wealthy
nations of the world at the end of the second world war was
the impossibility of returning to the pre-war situation in which
there was a great gulf between the few rich and the many poor.
Irrespective of what particular political party was in power,
the internal pressures in the rich countries of the world were
such that no post-war capitalist country could survive unless
it became a ‘Welfare State’. There might be differences in
degree in the extent of the social benefits given to the in-
dustrial and agricultural workers, but what was everywhere
impossible was a return to the mass unemployment and to the
low level of living of the pre-war years.

From the end of the nineteenth century onwards, colonies
had been regarded as a source of wealth which could be used
to mitigate the class conflicts in the capitalist States and, as
will be explained later, this policy had some success. But it
failed in its ultimate object because the pre-war capitalist
States were so organised internally that the bulk of the profit
made from colonial possessions found its way into the pockets
of the capitalist class and not into those of the workers. Far
from achieving the object intended, the working-class parties
at times tended to identify their interests with those of the
colonial peoples and the imperialist powers found themselves
engaged upon a conflict on two fronts, at home with their own
workers and abroad against the growing forces of colonial
liberation.

The post-war period inaugurated a very different colonial
policy. A deliberate attempt was made to divert colonial
earnings from the wealthy class and use them instead generally
to finance the ‘Welfare State’. As will be seen from the
examples given later, this was the method consciously adopted
even by those working-class leaders who had before the war
regarded the colonial peoples as their natural allies against their
capitalist enemies at home.

At first it was presumed that this object could be achieved
by maintaining the pre-war colonial system. Experience soon
proved that attempts to do so would be disastrous and would
only provoke colonial wars, thus dissipating the anticipated
gains from the continuance of the colonial regime. Britain, in
particular, realised this at an early stage and the correctness
of the British judgement at the time has subsequently been
demonstrated by the defeat of French colonialism in the Far
East and Algeria and the failure of the Dutch to retain any of
their former colonial empire.

The system of neo-colonialism was therefore instituted and
in the short run it has served the developed powers admirably.
It is in the long run that its consequences are likely to be
catastrophic for them.

Neo-colonialism is based upon the principle of breaking up
former large united colonial territories into a number of small
non-viable States which are incapable of independent develop-
ment and must rely upon the former imperial power for
defence and even internal security. Their economic and
financial systems are linked, as in colonial days, with those of
the former colonial ruler.

At first sight the scheme would appear to have many
advantages for the developed countries of the world. All the
Profits of neo-colonialism can be secured if, in any given area,
a reasonable proportion of the States have a neo-colonialist
system. It is not necessary that they all should have one.
Unless small States can combine they must be compelled to
sell their primary products at prices dictated by the developed
nations and buy their manufactured goods at the prices fixed
by them. So long as neo-colonialism can prevent political and
economic conditions for optimum development, the developing
countries, whether they are under neo-colonialist control or
not, will be unable to create a large enough market to support
industrialisation. In the same way they will lack the financial
strength to force the developed countries to accept their
primary products at a fair price.

In the neo-colonialist territories, since the former colonial
power has in theory relinquished political control, if the social
conditions occasioned by neo-colonialism cause a revolt the
local neo-colonialist government can be sacrificed and another
equally subservient one substituted in its place. On the other
hand, in any continent where neo-colonialism exists on a wide
scale the same social pressures which can produce revolts in ,
neo-colonial territories will also affect those States which have
refused to accept the system and therefore neo-colonialist ’
nations have a ready-made weapon with which they can
threaten their opponents if they appear successfully to be
challenging the system.

These advantages, which seem at first sight so obvious, are,
however, on examination, illusory because they fail to take
into consideration the facts of the world today.

The introduction of neo-colonialism increases the rivalry
between the great powers which was provoked by the old-style
colonialism. However little real power the government of a
neo-colonialist State may possess, it must have, from the very
fact of its nominal independence, a certain area of manoeuvre.
It may not be able to exist without a neo-colonialist master
but it may still have the ability to change masters.

The ideal neo-colonialist State would be one which was
wholly subservient to neo-colonialist interests but the existence
of the socialist nations makes it impossible to enforce the full
rigour of the neo-colonialist system. The existence of an
alternative system is itself a challenge to the neo-colonialist
regime. Warnings about ‘the dangers of Communist sub-
version’ are likely to be two-edged since they bring to the
notice of those living under a neo-colonialist system the
possibility of a change of regime. In fact neo-colonialism is the
victim of its own contradictions. In order to make it attractive
to those upon whom it is practised it must be shown as capable
of raising their living standards, but the economic object of
neo-colonialism is to keep those standards depressed in the
interest of the developed countries. It is only when this con-
tradiction is understood that the failure of innumerable ‘aid’
programmes, many of them well intentioned, can be explained.

In the first place, the rulers of neo-colonial States derive
their authority to govern, not from the will of the people, but
from the support which they obtain from their neo-colonialist
masters. They have therefore little interest in developing
education, strengthening the bargaining power of their workers
employed by expatriate firms, or indeed of taking any step
which would challenge the colonial pattern of commerce and
industry, which it is the object of neo-colonialism to preserve.
‘Aid’, therefore, to a neo-colonial State is merely a revolving
credit, paid by the neo-colonial master, passing through the
neo-colonial State and returning to the neo-colonial master in
the form of increased profits.

Secondly, it is in the field of ‘aid’ that the rivalry of individual
developed States first manifests itself. So long as neo-colonial-
ism persists so long will spheres of interest persist, and this
makes multilateral aid—which is in fact the only effective form
of aid—impossible.

Once multilateral aid begins the neo-colonialist masters are
faced by the hostility of the vested interests in their own
country. Their manufacturers naturally object to any attempt
to raise the price of the raw materials which they obtain from
the neo-colonialist territory in question, or to the establishment
there of manufacturing industries which might compete
directly or indirectly with their own exports to the territory.

ven education is suspect as likely to produce a student
Movement and it is, of course, true that in many less developed
countries the students have been in the vanguard of the fight
against neo-colonialism.

In the end the situation arises that the only type of aid which
the neo-colonialist masters consider as safe is ‘military aid’.

Once a neo-colonialist territory is brought to such a state of
economic chaos and misery that revolt actually breaks out
then, and only then, is there no limit to the generosity of the
neo-colonial overlord, provided, of course, that the funds
supplied are utilised exclusively for military purposes.

Military aid in fact marks the last stage of neo-colonialism
and its effect is self-destructive. Sooner or later the weapons
supplied pass into the hands of the opponents of the neo-
colonialist regime and the war itself increases the social
misery which originally provoked it.

Neo-colonialism is a mill-stone around the necks of the
developed countries which practise it. Unless they can rid
themselves of it, it will drown them. Previously the developed
powers could escape from the contradictions of neo-colonialism
by substituting for it direct colonialism. Such a solutionisno
longer possible and the reasons for it have been well explained
by Mr Owen Lattimore, the United States Far Eastern expert
and adviser to Chiang Kai-shek in the immediate post-war
period. He wrote:

‘Asia, which was so easily and swiftly subjugated by
conquerors in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, dis-
played an amazing ability stubbornly to resist modern armies
equipped with aeroplanes, tanks, motor vehicles and mobile
artillery.

Formerly big territories were conquered in Asia with
small forces. Income, first of all from plunder, then from
direct taxes and lastly from trade, capital investments and :
long-term exploitation, covered with incredible speed the
expenditure for military operations. This arithmetic repre-
sented a great temptation to strong countries. Now they have
run up against another arithmetic, and it discourages them.’

The same arithmetic is likely to apply throughout the less
developed world.

This book is therefore an attempt to examine neo-colonialism
not only in its African context and its relation to African unity,
put in world perspective. Neo-colonialism is by no means
exclusively an African question. Long before it was practised on
any large scale in Africa it was an established system in other
parts of the world. Nowhere has it proved successful, either in
raising living standards or in ultimately benefiting the
countries which have indulged in it.

Marx predicted that the growing gap between the wealth
of the possessing classes and the workers it employs would
ultimately produce a conflict fatal to capitalism in each
individual capitalist State.

This conflict between the rich and the poor has now been
transferred on to the international scene, but for proof of what
is acknowledged to be happening it is no longer necessary to
consult the classical Marxist writers. The situation is set out
with the utmost clarity in the leading organs of capitalist
opinion. Take for example the following extracts from The
Wall Street Journal, the newspaper which perhaps best reflects
United States capitalist thinking.

In its issue of 12 May 1965, under the headline of ‘Poor
Nations’ Plight’, the paper first analyses ‘which countries are
considered industrial and which backward’. There is, it
explains, ‘no rigid method of classification’. Nevertheless, it
points out:

‘A generally used breakdown, however, has recently been
maintained by the International Monetary Fund because,
in the words of an IMF official, “the economic demarcation
in the world is getting increasingly apparent.” The break-
down, the official says, “is based on simple common
sense.”

In the IMF’s view, the industrial countries are the
United States, the United Kingdom, most West European
nations, Canada and Japan. A special category called “other
developed areas” includes such other European lands as
Finland, Greece and Ireland, plus Australia, New Zealand
and South Africa. The IMF’s “less developed” category
embraces all of Latin America and nearly all of the Middle
East, non-Communist Asia and Africa.’

In other words the ‘backward’ countries are those situated
in the neo-colonial areas.

After quoting figures to support its argument, The Wall
Street Journal comments on this situation:

‘The industrial nations have added nearly $2 billion to
their reserves, which now approximate $52 billion. At the
same time, the reserves of the less-developed group not only
have stopped rising, but have declined some $200 million.
To analysts such as Britain’s Miss Ward, the significance
of such statistics is clear: the economic gap is rapidly widen-
ing ‘“‘between a white, complacent, highly bourgeois, very
wealthy, very small North Atlantic élite and everybody else,
and this is not a very comfortable heritage to leave to one’s
children.”

“Everybody else” includes approximately two-thirds of
the population of the earth, spread through about 100
nations.’

This is no new problem. In the opening paragraph of his
book, The War on World Poverty, written in 1953, the present
British Labour leader, Mr Harold Wilson, summarised the
major problem of the world as he then saw it:

‘For the vast majority of mankind the most urgent
problem is not war, or Communism, or the cost of living,
or taxation. It is hunger. Over 1,500,000,000 people, some-
thing like two-thirds of the world’s population, are living in
conditions of acute hunger, defined in terms of identifiable
nutritional disease. This hunger is at the same time the effect
and the cause of the poverty, squalor and misery in which
they live.’

Its consequences are likewise understood. The correspondent
of The Wall Street Fournal, previously quoted, underlines them:

‘... many diplomats and economists view the implications

as overwhelmingly—and dangerously—political. Unless the
present decline can be reversed, these analysts fear, the
United States and other wealthy industrial powers of the
West face the distinct possibility, in the words of British
economist Barbara Ward, “‘of a sort of international class
war”.

What is lacking are any positive proposals for dealing with
the situation. All that The Wall Street Fournal’s correspondent
can do is to point out that the traditional methods recom-
mended for curing the evils are only likely to make the
situation worse.

It has been argued that the developed nations should
effectively assist the poorer parts of the world, and that the
whole world should be turned into a Welfare State. However,
there seems little prospect that anything of this sort could be
achieved. The so-called ‘aid’ programmes to help backward
economies represent, according to a rough U.N. estimate, only
one half of one per cent of the total income of industrial
countries. But when it comes to the prospect of increasing such
aid the mood is one of pessimism:

‘A large school of thought holds that expanded share-the-
wealth schemes are idealistic and impractical. This school
contends climate, undeveloped human skills, lack of natural
resources and other factors—not just lack of money—
retard economic progress in many of these lands, and that
the countries lack personnel with the training or will to use
vastly expanded aid effectively. Share-the-wealth schemes,
according to this view, would be like pouring money down a
bottomless well, weakening the donor nations without
effectively curing the ills of the recipients.’

The absurdity of this argument is demonstrated by the fact
that every one of the reasons quoted to prove why the less
developed parts of the world cannot be developed applied
equally strongly to the present developed countries in the
Period prior to their development. The argument is only true
In this sense. The less developed world will not become
developed through the goodwill or generosity of the developed
powers. It can only become developed through a struggle
against the external forces which have a vested interest in
keeping it undeveloped.

Of these forces, neo-colonialism is, at this stage of history,
the principal.

I propose to analyse neo-colonialism, first, by examining the
state of the African continent and showing how neo-colonialism —,
at the moment keeps it artificially poor. Next, I propose to
show how in practice African Unity, which in itself can only be
established by the defeat of neo-colonialism, could immensely
raise African living standards. From this beginning, I propose
to examine neo-colonialism generally, first historically and
then by a consideration of the great international monopolies
whose continued stranglehold on the neo-colonial sectors of
the world ensures the continuation of the system.

1. Africa’s resources

AFRICA is a paradox which illustrates and highlights neo-
colonialism. Her earth is rich, yet the products that come from
above and below her soil continue to enrich, not Africans pre-
dominantly, but groups and individuals who operate to Africa’s
impoverishment. With a roughly estimated population of 280
million, about eight per cent of the world’s population, Africa
accounts for only two per cent of the world’s total production.
Yet even the present very inadequate surveys of Africa’s natural
resources show the continent to have immense, untapped
wealth. We know that iron reserves are put at twice the size of
America’s, and two-thirds those of the Soviet Union’s, on the
basis of an estimated two billion metric tons. Africa’s calculated
coal reserves are considered to be enough to last for three
hundred years. New petroleum fields are being discovered and
brought into production all over the continent. Yet production
of primary ores and minerals, considerable as it appears, has
touched only the fringes.

Africa has more than 40 per cent of the world’s potential
water power, a greater share than any other continent. Yet less
than five per cent of this volume has been utilised. Even taking
Into account the vast desert stretches of the Sahara, there is still
in Africa more arable and pasture land than exists in either the
United States of America or the Soviet Union. There is even
more than in Asia. Our forest areas are twice as great as those
of the United States.

If Africa’s multiple resources were used in her own develop-
ment, they could place her among the modernised continents
of the world. But her resources have been, and still are being
used for the greater development of overseas interests. Africa
provided to Britain in 1957 the following proportions of basic
materials used in her industries:

tin ore and concentrates 19%,
iron ore 29%,
manganese 80%
copper 46%
bauxite 47%
chrome ore 50%
asbestos 66%
cobalt 82%
antimony 91%

French imports from Africa include:

cotton 32% ,
iron ore 36%
zinc ore 51%
lead 85%
phosphates 100%
To Germany, Africa provided:
copper imports 8%
iron ore 10%
lead ore 12%
manganese ore 20%
chrome ore 22%
phosphorites 711% ,

Yet in none of the new African countries is there a single
integrated industry based upon any one of these resources.

Although possessing fifty-three of the world’s most impor-
tant basic industrial minerals and metals, the African continent
tails far behind all others.in industrial development. Gauged
on the production of primary products output in the total
economic activity, by comparison with the country of most
advanced production, the United States of America, the facts
can be seen at a glance.

 

 

3 g g
2 ge) 8|8s|,/] $8
: se; gigs] 2! $8
Country Year 3 Be 2 Ps 2 8. 2 fie 22 g
Bse| € /28/ & (EE) § Sauls
agm} = (85/56 led) 5 |f£a8i6
Algeria 1958 21 3/11] 6} 6]; 19} 22 | 12
Congo (L.) 1958 26 | 16/12! 6); 9 7| 14 | 16
Kenya 1958 42 1/10) 4; 9413} 10 | 11
Morocco 1958 34 6/18; 4] * | 15 10 13
Nigeria 1956 63 1); 2] 11/1 4 6 3
Rhodesia and
Nyasaland 1958 20 | 14/11) 8] 9 | 10 4 | 24
Tanganyika 1958 59 4! 7/ 6] 7 5 7 5
Republic of
S. Africa 1958 12 } 13} 2!| 5; 8}12] 10 | 20
U.S.A. 1959 4 1/30! 5] 8} 17} 13 | 22

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

From the United Nations Statistical Year Book, 1960 (figures are percentages).

It will be noted that in America agriculture, forestry and
fishing provide a mere four per cent of the total national
activity, and mining a trifling one per cent. On the other hand,
industry, manufacture and commerce provide 47 per cent. In
the African countries included in the table, which are, with the

* Included under ‘Others’.
NEO-COLONIALISM °

exception of Nigeria, those with the highest settler communities
and therefore the most exploited, agriculture is predominant.
Industry, manufacture and commerce lag far behind. Even in
the case of South Africa, the most highly industrialised sector
of the African continent, the contribution of agriculture (12
per cent) and mining (13 per cent) are equal to those of
industry, manufacture and construction put together. .

However, on the whole, mining has proved a most profitable
venture for foreign capital investment in Africa. Its benefits for
Africans have by no means been on an equal scale. Mining
production in a number of African countries has a value of less
than $2 per head of population. As Europe (France) Outremer
puts it, ‘It is quite certain that a mining production of $1 or $2
per inhabitant cannot appreciably affect a country’s standard of
living.’ Affirming correctly that ‘in the zones of exploitation, the
mining industry introduces a higher standard of living’, the
journal is forced to the conclusion that mining exploitations are,
however, relatively privileged isolated islands in a very poor
total economy. *

The reason for this is seen in the absence of industry and
manufacture, owing to the fact that mining production is des-
tined principally for exportation, mainly in primary form. It
goes to feed the industries and factories of Europe and America,
to the impoverishment of the countries of origin.

It is also remarked by Europe (France) Outremer that about
50 per cent of Africa’s mining production remains in the
country of origin as wages. Even the most cursory glance at the
annual accounts of the mining companies refutes this claim.
The excess of revenue over expenditure in many cases proves
conclusively by its size that wages received by manual labour
form by no means such an exaggerated proportion of value
produced as 50 per cent. The considerable sums which go in
highly paid salaries to European staffs in the skilled and
administrative categories, part of which is returned to their
own countries, must in many instances amount to the total
received by African labour, to say nothing of the large amounts
which swell the yearly incomes of wealthy directors who reside
in the metropolitan cities of the west.

The assumption also ignores another important fact, namely
that wages of manual workers, low as they are, are partly spent
on goods manufactured abroad and imported, taking out of the
primary producing countries a good part of the workers’ wages.
In many cases, the imported goods are the products of the
companies associated with the mining groups. Frequently, they
are sold in the companies’ own stores on the mining compounds
or by their appointed agents, the workers having to pay prices
fixed by the companies.

The poverty of the people of Africa is demonstrated by the
simple fact that their income per capita is among the lowest in
the world.

Income per capita U.S. $, 1960-63

 

 

Under $80 $81-125 $126-200 ) $200-250 | Over $400
Basutoland Angola Liberia Algeria South
Bechuanaland | Cameroun | Libya Cote Africa
Burundi Republic | Morocco d’Ivoire
Chad Congo (L.) | Swaziland | Gabon
Congo (B.) Gambia Tunisia Ghana |
Dahomey Guinea Mauritius
Ethiopia Kenya Senegal
Guinea de Sao | Malagasy South-west
Malawi Republic Africa
Mali Mauritania Zambia
Mozambique Sierra Leone Rhodesia
Niger Sudan . (Zimbabwe)
Nigeria Togo
Rwanda United Arab
Somalia Republic
Tanganyika-

Zanzibar
Uganda
Voltaic

Republic

 

 

 

 

 
NEO-COLONIALISM

 

In some countries, for example Gabon and Zambia, up to
half the domestic product is paid to resident expatriates and to
overseas firms who own the plantations and mines. In Guinea
de Sao, Angola, Libya, Swaziland, South-West Africa and
Zimbabwe (Rhodesia), foreign firm profits and settler or
expatriate incomes exceed one-third of the domestic product.
Algeria, Congo and Kenya were in this group before inde-
pendence.

On achieving independence, almost every new state of Africa
has developed plans for industrialisation and rounded eco-
nomic growth in order to improve productive capacity and
thereby raise the standard of living of its people. But while
Africa remains divided progress is bound to be painfully slow.
Economic development is dependent not only on the availa-
bility of natural resources and the size and population of a
country, but on economic size, which takes into account both
population and income per capita. In many African States the
population and per capita products are extremely small, giving
an economic unit no larger than a medium-sized firm ina >
western capitalist country, or a single State enterprise in a
European socialist economy.

Africa is having to pay a huge price once more for the his-
torical accident that this vast and compact continent brought
fabulous profits to western capitalism, first out of the trade in
its people and then out of imperialist exploitation. This enrich-
ment of one side of the world out of the exploitation of the
other has left the African economy without the means to
industrialise. At the time when Europe passed into its industrial
revolution, there was a considerably narrower gap in develop-
ment between the continents. But with every step in the
evolution of productive methods and the increased profits
drawn from the more and more shrewd investment in manu-
facturing equipment and base metal production, the gap wid-
ened by leaps and bounds.

The Report of the U.N. Economic Commission for Africa
published in December 1962 under the title of Industrial
Growth in Africa states that the gap between ‘the continents
separated by the Mediterranean’ has widened faster during the
twentieth century than ever before. True, per capita output has
increased in Africa, particularly in the last two decades, which
have seen an increase of some 10 to 20 per cent. Already far
ahead, the industrial countries have marked a per capita advance
in the same period of 60 per cent, and their per capita industrial
production may be estimated as high as twenty-five times that
in Africa as 4 whole. The difference for the greater part of
Africa, however, is even more marked, since industry on this
continent tends to be concentrated in small areas in the north
and south. A real transformation of the African economy would
mean not only doubling agricultural output but increasing
industrial output some twenty-five times. The Report makes it
plain that industry rather than agriculture is the means by
which rapid improvement in Africa’s living standards 1s
possible.

There are, however, imperialist specialists and apologists who
urge the less developed countries to concentrate on agriculture
and leave industrialisation for some later time when their
populations shall be well fed. The world’s economic develop-
ment, however, shows that it is only with advanced industrial-
isation that it has been possible to raise the nutritional level of
the people by raising their levels of income. Agriculture is
important for many reasons, and the governments of African
states concerned with bringing higher standards to their people
are devoting greater investment to agriculture. But even to
make agriculture yield more the aid of industrial output is
needed; and the under-developed world cannot for ever be
placed at the mercy of the more industrialised. This depend-
ence must slow the rate of increase in our agriculture and make
it subservient to the demands of the industrial producers. That
is why we cannot accept such sweeping assessments as that
made by Professor Leopold G. Scheidl of the Vienna School of
Economics at a recent meeting in London of the International
Geographical Congress. Commented Professor Scheid]: ‘People
in developing countries seem to think that all that is necessary
for them to become as wealthy as the west is to build factories.
Most experts agree that it is wiser and more promising to
develop agriculture into self-sufficiency and on to the level of
a marketing economy’ (The Times, 24 July 1964). This train of
thought links up directly with that of the chairman of Booker
Brothers, Sir Jock Campbell whose combine of companies is
busy monopolising sugar and by-product industries in British
Guiana, shipping and trading in the Caribbean and East Africa,
and is now penetrating into the west of the African continent.

Sir Jock Campbell asserted at the Annual address of the Africa
Bureau in London on 29 November 1962 that ‘agriculture was

the basis of African development and that plantations were an
effective method of increasing economic potential’. He con-
sidered that ‘so long as industrialised agriculture employed men
free to come and go, it was preferable in terms both of efficiency
and liberty to the communised collective farming whose results
had fallen short of expectation both in Russia and China’ (The
Times, 30 November 1962). He does not seem to have con-
vinced the sugar workers of British Guiana, and it is a moot
point whether he has been able to impress the benefits of his
‘free to come and go’ plantation philosophy on the workers for

his companies in Nyasaland, Rhodesia and South Africa. Even >
the scientific supporters of the imperialist pattern are aware of
the flaws in their injunctions, but they cunningly attribute the
emphasis placed by the developing states upon industrialisation
to political ambitions rather than to economic and social
necessity. A European representative of the University of
Malaya, Mr D. W. Fryer, speaking at the meeting of the
International Geographical Conference to which reference is
made above, said that ‘an increase in the efficiency of traditional
export industries in the under-developed countries was an
obvious move, but it was politically unattractive. It suggested
continued acceptance of the old colonial economy... .
Industrialism was an integral part of the nationalist movement.
Its mainspring was not economic but political, and political
expediency was often more important than economic efficiency
in the location of new industry’.

The more efficient management of primary production and
improvement on a marketing level is imperialism’s gain and our
loss. The point has been made quite clearly by no less a person
than the chairman of Bolsa (the Bank of London and South
America), Sir George Bolton. The latter was reported in The
Financial Times of 6 March 1964 as being confident of a rise in
commodity prices, which would have cgnsiderable effect on the
foreign exchanges. For whose benefit? Sir George provides the
answer. ‘It should help the reserve currencies, sterling and the
dollar,’ he said. Why? Because being tied to these currencies,
‘the primary producers will be accumulating their surpluses in
sterling and dollar balances’. This appears to be nothing short
of a direct confession of the major interest of the banking and
financial world in the exploitation of the developing countries.
It is interesting, therefore, to note that Bolsa’s transfer agents
in London are Patino Mines & Enterprises Consolidated, the
American-controlled combine operating mines in Latin America
and Canada, and intimately associated with the groups engaged
in exploiting Africa’s natural resources.

We are certainly not against marketing and trading. On the
contrary, we are for a widening of our potentialities in these
spheres, and we are convinced that we shall be able to adjust
the balance in our favour only by developing an agriculture
attuned to our needs and supporting it with a rapidly increasing
industrialisation that will break the neo-colonialist pattern
which at present operates.

A continent like Africa, however much it increases its agri-
cultural output, will not benefit unless it is sufficiently politi-
cally and economically united to force the developed world to
pay it a fair price for its cash crops.

To give one illustration. Both Ghana and Nigeria have in the
post-war independence period enormously developed their
production of cocoa, as the table on page 10 shows.

This result has not been obtained by chance, it is the conse-
quence of heavy internal expenditure on control of disease and
pests, the subsidising of insecticides and the spraying machines
provided to farmers and the importing of new varieties of cocoa
seedlings which are resistant to the endemic ills which previous
cocoa trees had developed. By means such as these Africa as a
whole greatly increased her cocoa production, while that of
Latin America remained stationary.

What advantage has Nigeria or Ghana gained through this
stupendous increase in agricultural productivity? In 1954/5
when Ghana’s production was 210,000 tons, her 1954 earnings
from the cocoa crop were £854 million. This year (1964/5) with
an estimated crop of 590,000 tons, the estimated external
earnings will be around £77 million. Nigeria has suffered a

 

Cocoa Bean Production

 

 

 

Index
Long Tons 1949/50 =100

Ghana Nigeria Ghana | Nigeria
1949/50 248,000 99,000 100 100 1950
1950/51 262,000 110,000 106 111 1951]
1951/52 211,000 108,000 85 109 1952
1952/53 247,000 109,000 100 110 1953
1953/54 211,000 97,000 85 98 1954
1954/55 220,000 89,000 89 90 1955
1955/56 237,000 114,000 96 155 1956 *
1956/57 264,000 135,000 106 136 1957)
1957/58 207,000 81,000 83 82 1958
1958/59 255,000 140,000 103 141 1959
1959/60 317,000 155,000 128 157 1960
1960/61 432,000 195,000 174 197 1961
1961/62 410,000 191,000 165 193 1962
1962/63 422,000 176,000 170 |, 170 1963
1963/64 421,000 217,000 170 219 1964
1964/65 590,000 310,000 238 313 1965
(estimate)

 

 

 

 

 

 

similar experience. In 1954/5 she produced 89,000 tons of beans)’
and received for her crop £39} million. In 1965 it is estimated
that Nigeria will produce 310,000 tons and is likely to receive

for it around £40 million. In other words, Ghana and Nigeria
have trebled their production of this particular agricultural
product but their gross earnings from it have fallen from £125
million to £117 million.

A detailed study of production and price shows that it is the
developed consuming country which obtains the advantage of
the increased production in the less developed one. So long as
African agricultural producers are disunited they will be unable
to control the market price of their primary products.

As experience with the Cocoa Producers Alliance has shown,
any organisation which is based on a mere commercial agree-
ment between primary producers is insufficient to secure a fair
world price. This can only be obtained when the united power
of the producer countries is harnessed by common political and
economic policies and has behind it the united financial
resources of the States concerned.

So long as Africa remains divided it will therefore be the
wealthy consumer countries who will dictate the price of
African cash crops. Nevertheless, even if Africa could dictate
the price of its cash crops this would not by itself provide the
balanced economy which is necessary for development. The
answer must be industrialisation.

The African continent, however, cannot hope to industrialise
effectively in the haphazard, Jaisser-faire manner of Europe. In
the first place, there is the time factor. In the second, the
socialised modes of production and tremendous human and
capital investments involved call for cohesive and integrated
planning. Africa will need to bring to its aid all its latent
ingenuity and talent in order to meet the challenge that inde-
pendence and the demands of its peoples for better living have
raised. The challenge cannot be met on any piece-meal scale,
but only by the total mobilisation of the continent’s resources
within the framework of comprehensive socialist planning and
deployment.

We have noted that in the countries of the highest settler
populations, and therefore the most exploited so far in Africa
(Algeria, Congo, Kenya, Morocco, Rhodesia, Malawi, South
Africa, Tanganyika), agriculture is predominant. In the case of
South Africa, the most highly developed area of the African
Continent, the contribution of agriculture and mining is together
€qual to that of industry, manufacture and construction. South
Africa’s economy is heavily bolstered by the export of its
mining output. Gold contributes up to 70 per cent of the total
exports, which makes the economy, for all its apparent boom,
and the heavily increasing foreign investment, basically almost
as insecure as that of the less developed countries of the
continent. For all its pushing secondary industries, its chemi-
cals manufacture, military production, steel processing and the
rest, South Africa has so far failed to lay down the basis of solid
industrialisation. G. E. Menell, chairman of Anglo-Transvaal
Consolidated Investment Company, which controls gold, dia-
monds and uranium, made a most telling statement in his annual
address on 6 December 1963 to the Johannesburg ‘shareholders’
meeting. “The nation’s economy is based, to a significant
degree, on wasting assets—the gold mines of the Transvaal and
Orange Free State. We have become more and more aware of
this in recent years as more mines near the end of their lives
without any sign of new large goldfields, in spite of the many
millions being spent on exploration.’

Investment in South Africa’s economy comes mainly from
Western capital with which local finance, not hardy enough to
stand on its own feet, is strongly bound. Quick profits are the
incentive, so that while Anglo-Transvaal’s chairman sees the
dangers to the economy, he was nonetheless happy to be able
to announce that record. profits were again achieved in 1963.

The whole of the economy is geared to the interests of the
foreign capital that dominates it. South Africa’s banking insti-
tutions, like those of most other African States, are offshoots of
the Western banking and financial houses. South Africa is
dominated by western monopoly even more than by any other
sector of the continent, because the investments are many times
greater and the dependence upon gold and other mining as the
centre of the economy gears it inextricably to that monopoly.
Its vulnerability is intensified by the fact that it is a supplier of
crude and semi-finished products to the factories of the west on
a larger scale than the rest of Africa, and an earner of greater
profits for their financial backers.

Nigeria tells in a few basic figures a tale of a different kind of
economic maladjustment. In 1960 agriculture, forestry and
fishing accounted for 63 per cent of the economic activity;
mining one per cent. The imbalance is emphasised by the
extremely low ratio of two per cent for industry and manu-
facture, eliminating at once any comparison with the one per
cent contribution of mining and four per cent of agriculture to
America’s total economic product. In the case of the United
States, this low proportion supports a vast superstructure of
industry and manufacture. In Nigeria it connotes simply a total
disregard under colonialism of Nigeria’s potentialities. The
reason for this lies not in the fact that Nigeria is devoid of
natural industrial resources, as recent findings of oil and iron
confirm. It was that Nigeria’s agriculture provided greater
profitability for European investment than the risks that were
involved in the larger capital provisions called for by mining
exploration and exploitation.

In 1962 petroleum and petroleum products contributed 9-9
per cent to Nigeria’s exports, but it is Shell-BP that hopes to
reap most of the benefits. The bulk of these exports was in
crude oil, exceeding three million tons. The oil company is
aiming at an export target of five million tons of crude oil by
1965. Processing plants are in Europe, not in Nigeria.

The oil refinery going up in Port Harcourt is owned by
Shell-BP; the natural gas piping is owned by Shell-Barclays
D.C. & O. The oil refinery is meant to handle only ten per cent
of Nigeria’s crude oil output, and its products will serve only
Nigeria’s domestic market. Such an arrangement makes it
possible not to disturb operations outside Nigeria while making
super profits on Nigerian operations.

Generally speaking, in spite of the exploration costs, which
are written off for tax purposes anyway and many times covered
by eventual profits, mining has proved a very profitable venture
for foreign capital investment in Africa. Its benefits for the
Africans on the other hand, despite all the frothy talk to the
Contrary, have been negligible.

This is explained by the absence of industry and manufacture
based upon the use of domestic natural resources, and of the
trade that is their concomitant. For mining production is
destined principally for exportation in its primary form. Certain
exceptions to this generalisation are to be found in South
Africa, Zambia and the Congo. Some small conversion has been
taking place also in countries like Morocco, Algeria, Mozam-
bique. South Africa’s copper is exported in the form of metal
and a small part of its iron is sent overseas as ingots; its gold is
refined. But for these exceptions, most exported minerals are
shipped from Africa in their primary state. They gotofeedthe ~~
industries and plants of Europe, America and Japan. The ore
that is to be produced in Swaziland by the Swaziland Iron Ore
Development Company (owned jointly by Anglo-American
Corporation and the powerful British steel group, Guest Keen
& Nettlefolds) will go at the rate of 1,200,000 tons annually for
ten years from 1964 to a Japanese steel combine.

When the countries of their origin are obliged to buy back
their minerals and other raw products in the form of finished
goods, they do so at grossly inflated prices. A General Electric
advertisement carried in the March/April 1962 issue of Modern
Government informs us that ‘from the heart of Africa to the
hearths of the world’s steel mills comes ore for stronger steel, |.
better steel—steel for buildings, machinery, and more steel
rails’, With this steel from Africa, General Electric supplies
transportation for bringing out another valuable mineral for its
own use and that of other great imperialist exploiters. In lush
verbiage the same advertisement describes how ‘deep in the
tropical jungle of Central Africa lies one of the world’s richest
deposits of manganese ore’. But is it for Africa’s needs? Not at
all. The site, which is ‘being developed by the French concern,
Compagnie Miniere de l’Ogooue, is located on the upper reach
of the Ogooue River in the Gabon Republic. After the ore is
mined it will first be carried 50 miles by cableway. Then it will "
be transferred to ore cars and hauled 300 miles by diesel-
electric locomotives to the port of Point Noire for shipment to
the world’s steel mills’. For ‘the world’ read the United States
first and France second.

That exploitation of this nature can take place is due to the
balkanisation of the African continent. Balkanisation is the
major instrument of neo-colonialism and will be found wher-
ever neo-colonialism is practised.

2. Obstacles to economic progress

SPEAKING of West Africa in 1962, the United Nations Eco-
nomic Commission for Africa pointed out:

‘Few other regions of the world show such a multitude of
fairly small States both as far as production and population
go. The only similar region of some importance is Central
America.’

West Africa is in fact divided into nineteen separate inde-
pendent States and includes two colonial enclaves possessed by
Spain and Portugal. The population of the area is about a third
of the total population of Africa, yet the average population of
the independent countries, if Nigeria is excluded, is about 2-3
million. It is, however, illusory to regard even Nigeria as an
exception to the balkanisation policy practised by the departing
colonial rulers. The constitution imposed on Nigeria at inde-
pendence divided the country into three regions (which have
since grown to four) loosely joined on a Federal basis but with
sufficient powers left to the regions to cripple overall economic
Planning. If the other States of West Africa are examples of
Political balkanisation, Nigeria is an example of economic
balkanisation. Ghana, with a population of over seven million,
only escaped a similar fate by the resistance put up by the

nvention People’s Party government to a British plan which
Would have created no less than five regions, some with a
population of less than one million, yet each possessing sufh-
cient powers to defeat central planning.

Kenya, which was also forced to accept at independence a
similar type of constitution, has only recently been able to
establish a unified regime.

When France was faced with the possibility of being forced
to accept some form of independence, or at least self- 4
government, for the territories of the old colonial federations
of French West and Equatorial Africa, a series of balkanisation
measures were adopted by the French Government. The
Loi-Cadre of 1956 established the frontiers of the present
French-speaking States. The dismantling process begun by the
Loi-Cadre was completed by the referendum of 1958 on the
Constitution of the French Fifth Republic. Each of the terri-
tories established by the Loi-Cadre was called upon to decide
separately whether it wished to remain an overseas territory of
France, an automonous Republic within the French Community
or to be independent.

Teresa Hayter, a research assistant of the British Overseas .
Development Institute, in the April 1965 issue of the journal
of the British Royal Institute of International Affairs has
described the process:

 

‘The territories were to make separate decisions; it was
therefore they and not the Federations of West and Equa-
torial Africa which were legally to inherit France’s powers;
no provision was made for strengthening the Federal institu-
tions and in fact they were dismantled after the referendum
and came formally to an end in April 1959. The original
purpose of the Federations had been to enable the colonies to
pay for themselves, through a reallocation of their revenues;
. . . Senghor in particular has bitterly accused France of
“balkanising” Africa in the Loi-Cadre. . . . With the choice
so loaded, only Guinea voted against the Constitution; all
the others became autonomous republics, members of the
Franco-African Community.’

Fearing that the example of Guinea might be followed by
other states which had decided to join the Community, the
French Government removed everything of value from the
territory. Administrators and teachers were withdrawn.
Documents and even electric light bulbs were removed from
government buildings. Financial assistance, trade support and
the payment of pensions to Guinean war veterans were
discontinued.

Despite the pressure placed on Guinea in this way, the
remaining French States were forced by internal pressure to
seek political independence. This destroyed the conception
usually associated with General de Gaulle, the originator of
the French Community, of a non-sovereign group of African
States each separately linked to France. One after another
the ‘autonomous Republics’ obtained international sovereignty
but under such adverse conditions that they had in fact to
maintain all the military, financial, commercial and economic
links of the previous colonial period. In order to exist
at all as independent States, these former French territories
were forced to accept French ‘aid’ even to meet their recurrent
expenses.

French ‘aid’ to developing countries is, in proportion to the
French national income, the highest in the world and is, in
absolute terms, the second highest. Nearly all of this ‘aid’ is
absorbed by commitments in Africa, and nearly half of it goes
to the fourteen States which were previously autonomous
republics and whose combined population is only slightly
larger than that of Nigeria. Aid of this type can dictate African
relations with the developed world and, as experience has
shown, can be extremely dangerous to the recipients.

French African aid originally arose from the advantage which
French firms and individuals derived from the African franc
zone and this has determined the framework in which the aid
1s still provided. So long as the relationship which the aid
Provided was profitable to France it naturally continued. It was
in effect a levy on French taxpayers for the benefit of French
individuals and firms.

The overall value of the policy to France was that in return
for guaranteed markets and prices for colonial primary products,
such as coffee, cocoa, groundnuts, bananas and cotton, the
African States had to import from France fixed quantities of
certain goods, such as machinery, textiles, sugar and flour,
which were then uncompetitive in price or surplus in Europe,
and in addition the States were forced to limit their imports
from countries outside the franc zone. While this scheme made
nonsense of any plan for inter-African trade it was for a period
highly profitable to France. With the fall in the world price of
primary commodities these profits began to diminish, as did
enthusiasm for ‘aid’ in France. At the present moment the
most which can be said in favour of French aid is that it does
not now, as it did in the past, make an actual profit for France
from the less developed States of its former African empire.
Teresa Hayter sums it up:

‘France does not gain in its transactions with the States
nor does it lose: aid, private investment, French Government
expenditures and imports from them are balanced by exports
to them, repatriation of capital and remittances of profits and
salaries.’

This state of affairs is considered to be no longer of value to
France. The Jeanneney Report published in 1964 and express-
ing the official French view, pointed out that the protective
system of the French zone was no longer in the interests of
France and the Report therefore advocated the re-deployment
of French aid. In any event, France had to comply with her
obligations to the European Common Market. Under the new
Convention of Association which came into force in the summer
of 1964, the six members of the European Common Market are
to achieve in stages a free trade area and this will no longer
make it possible for France to discriminate in favour of the
African States nor for these States to discriminate against
France’s Common Market partners. Exports from these States
will by the end of a five-year period have to be aligned to world
prices. In consequence the primary production which they have
built up on the strength of the promise of guaranteed markets
and prices is likely to fail to be competitive in world con-
ditions. It is difficult to see how Senegal in particular can
manage without a French subsidy for her groundnuts, and
President Senghor has already called attention to the serious
economic position into which this puts his country.

In fact, the limited neo-colonialism of the French period is
now being merged in the collective neo-colonialism of the
European Common Market which enables other States, hitherto
outside the French preserve, to profit by the system. It also
rationalises the division of Africa into economic zones based
upon Europe, by drawing in four other States. The Congo
(Leopoldville), Burundi and Rwanda are, as previous Belgian
colonies, tied to the Belgian economic system and Somalia
through its previous association with Italy is also brought in as
an associated State of the Common Market.

A grouping such as this raises the wider problems of African
neo-colonialism and emphasises its irresponsible nature. Of the
States carved out of the former French colonies one, Guinea,
has been able, with great suffering and losses it is true, to cut
free from the type of neo-colonialist control imposed on the
others. Mali has been forced to accept some of the rules and
regulations which govern the relations of the former French
colonies to France, but at least she has set up her own currency,
limits transfers of money abroad and receives from France only
a partial guarantee of the parity of her currency with the French
franc. In the case of all the other States their currencies have
been stabilised on a fixed parity with the French franc and have
a total guarantee from the French Treasury. These States pay
their receipts of French francs into operation accounts in the
French Treasury. These accounts can be overdrawn and the
States can draw on them against their own currencies to an
unlimited extent. Obviously, however, whatever the theoretical
position, the international financial position of these countries
1s subject to control in that at any time their operation accounts
in the French Treasury could be blocked, as was done in the
Case of Guinea. Most, at any rate, of the States concerned lack
the strength to stand up against such pressure as did Guinea.

Why then, it may be asked, are these powers not sufficient to
enable France to persuade these States to follow present French
foreign policy which is based upon a ‘third force’ concept?
France did not support the United States and Belgium in their
‘humanitarian’ intervention at Stanleyville in the Congo. Unlike
Britain and the other Common Market countries, France has
openly opposed the United States policy in Santo Domingo,
has recognised the Peoples’ Republic of China and has recom-
mended the neutralisation of Vietnam. Yet only a minority of
the African States which would appear to be under French
neo-colonial control have followed the French line. The
majority of them refuse to recognise China or in any way
criticise United States policy. Indeed they behave in a fashion
suggestive of being under United States rather than French
influence. The answer to this apparent paradox will, I believe,
be found in the following chapters of this book in which I
attempt to explain the power and ramifications of international
financial control. Here one has a super State which can at times
even override the policy wishes of the nominal neo-colonial
master.

The control of the funds of the French neo-colonial African
States is exercised by the administrative council of their central
banks, which are composed partly of Frenchmen without whose |
agreement no decision in monetary policy can be taken. This
French banking complex, with its absolute control of the
currencies and external payments of the French neo-colonial
States, could, in theory, dictate that these States follow a
French policy. However, the complex is itself subject, in the
manner later described, to external pressures which support
United States rather than French policies where a difference of
opinion arises.

Part of the value of commencing a study of neo-colonialism
in its African context is that it provides examples of every type
of the system. It is impossible to define the African situation in
terms of independent States, divided into the non-aligned
and the neo-colonialist camp, colonies and racialist States such
as South Africa. In Africa, all former colonies which have now
become independent, including particularly South Africa, are
subject in some degree to neo-colonialist pressures which how-
ever much they wish to resist they cannot entirely escape,
struggle as they may. The difference in reality is between those
States that accept neo-colonialism as a policy and those which
resist it. Similarly, the colonial problem of Africa is in many
ways really neo-colonial. The Portuguese African territories
appear at first sight only to raise the issue of freedom from
colonial rule but in fact they exist as colonies only because
Portugal is itself a neo-colonial State. For the last fifty years the
great powers have regarded the Portuguese colonies as counters
which they can exchange between themselves in order to
readjust the balance of power. In 1913 the British and Germans
had initialled an agreement for their division and this was only
prevented by the outbreak of the first world war. In the
appeasement period prior to the second world war, when it
was thought that Hitler could be bought off by an offer of
colonial territory, the Portuguese colonies were again regarded
as the suitable bribe.

If Portugal controls these colonies now it is only because of
the military strength which she derives through her NATO
alliance. Portugal is however not a member of NATO because
of any military assistance which she could render the alliance
but because this is a convenient way by which Portuguese
territory can be made available to the forces of other members
of the alliance.

At the other end of the scale is the French colony of Somalia.
It continues to exist as a colony not because France would
resist pressure to grant it independence but because of African
disunity. It is a point of dispute between Somalia and Ethiopia.
African disunity maintains this colony. If it were to go to either
of its neighbours it would almost inevitably provoke a conflict
between them.

Rhodesia, while theoretically a colony, is really a fossilised
form of the earliest type of neo-colonialism which was practised
in southern Africa until the formation of the Union of South
Africa. The essence of the Rhodesia system is not to employ
individuals drawn from the people of the territory itself to run
the country, as in the newer type of neo-colonial State, but to
utilise instead an alien minority. The majority of the European
Tuling class of Rhodesia only came to the Colony after the
second world war, but it is they and not the African inhabi-
tants, who outnumber them 16 to 1, that Britain regards as
‘the Government’. This racialist State is protected from out-
side pressure because under international law it is a British
colony, while Britain herself excuses her failure to exercise her
legal rights to prevent the oppression and exploitation of the
African inhabitants (of which of course she officially disap-
proves) because of a supposed British parliamentary con-
vention. In other words, by maintaining Rhodesia nominally as
a colony, Britain in fact gives her official protection as a second
South Africa and the European racialists are left free to treat
the African inhabitants as they will.

The Rhodesian system thus has all the hallmarks of the neo-
colonial model. The patron power, Britain, awards to a local
government over which it claims to have no control unlimited
rights and exploitation within the territory. Yet Britain still
retains powers to exclude other countries from intervening
either to liberate its African population or to bring its economy
into some other zone of influence. The manoeuvring over
Rhodesia’s ‘independence’ is an excellent example of the
workings of neo-colonialism and of the practical difficulties to
which the system gives rise. A European minority of less than
a quarter of a million could not maintain, in the conditions of
Africa today, rule over four million Africans without external
support from somewhere. When the settlers talk of ‘inde-
pendence’ they are not thinking of standing on their own feet
but merely of seeking a new neo-colonialist master who would,
in their view, be more reliable than Britain.

As will be seen from the chapters which follow, modern
neo-colonialism is based upon the control of nominally inde-
pendent States by giant financial interests. These interests often
act through or on behalf of a particular capitalist State, but they
are quite capable of acting on their own and forcing those
imperial countries in which they have a dominant interest to
follow their lead. There is, however, an older type of neo-
colonialism which is based primarily on military considerations.

A world power, having decided on principles of global
strategy that it is necessary to have a military base in this or that
nominally independent country, must ensure that the country
where the base is situated is friendly. Here is another reason for
palkanisation. If the base can be situated in a country which is
so constituted economically that it cannot survive without sub-
stantial ‘aid’ from the military power which owns the base,
then, so it is argued, the security of the base can be assured.
Like so many of the other assumptions on which neo-colonialism
is based this one is false. The presence of foreign bases arouses
popular hostility to the neo-colonial arrangements which permit
them more quickly and more surely than does anything else,
and throughout Africa these bases are disappearing. Libya may
be quoted as an example of how this policy has failed.

Libya has had a long colonial history. From the sixteenth
century onwards it was a Turkish colony, but in 1900, in the
heyday of colonialism, France and Italy agreed that if Italy
would not oppose France occupying Morocco, France would
not oppose Italy occupying Libya. So when in 1911 and 1912
France was occupying Morocco, Italy went to war with Turkey
and, defeating her, annexed Libya.

Despite promises during the second world war to the
people of Libya that they would never again be subjected to
Italian rule, France tried at the peace settlement to have Italy
reinstalled in order to support her own position in Tunisia.
This solution proving impossible, Libya became nominally
independent but actually under British neo-colonial control.

According to the figures collated by the British Overseas
Development Institute, during the period 1945 to 1963 Libya
received no less than 17 per cent of the total bilateral aid which
Britain gave to all foreign countries outside the Commonwealth
in that period. The Overseas Development Institute notes that
‘although these payments to Libya are counted as “‘aid”’ there
1s no doubt that they are in essence straightforward payments
to the Libyan Government in return for the use of bases’.
Nevertheless, popular pressure in Libya has now made it
necessary for the Libyan Government to terminate the military
agreement for British bases.

_ These limitations on the real independence of many countries
_ in Africa should not be allowed to obscure the very great
achievements already gained in the struggle for African inde-
Pendence and unity.

In 1945 Africa largely comprised the colonial territories of
European powers, and the idea that the greater part of the
continent would be independent within twenty years would
have seemed impossible to any political observer in the
immediate post-war period. Yet, not only has independence
been achieved but considerable progress has been made towards
the establishment of African unity. To this unity there are still
powerful obstacles but they are no greater than the obstacles
already overcome and, if their nature is understood, they are
clearly surmountable.

Already, and this will ultimately be the decisive factor, the
mass of the African people support unity in the same way as
they previously supported the various local movements for
political independence. Many of the political leaders of French
West Africa, for example, did not at first support independence.
In 1946, in the French National Assembly, of which he was
then a member, M. Houphouet-Boigny, the President of the
Ivory Coast, claimed ‘there are no separatists on these benches
. .. there is a powerful bond, capable of resisting all tests, a
moral bond which unites us. It is the ideal of liberty, fraternity,
equality, for whose triumph France has never hesitated to
sacrifice its most noble blood’. The same policy of the mainte-
nance of unity with France was also: supported at that time by
President Senghor of Senegal, who said, “The French union
must be a conjunction of civilisations, a melting-pot of culture

.. it is a marriage rather than an association.’

It was mass pressure for independence which forced these
leaders to reverse their previous positions and to declare them-
selves in favour of national sovereignty.

In the same way as mass pressure made it impossible for an
African leader to oppose independence, so today mass pressure
makes it impossible for him openly to oppose African unity.
Those who are against it can only show their opposition in
indirect ways: by suggesting that the pace towards it is too fast;
that this or that plan is impracticable or that there are pro-
cedural difficulties which prevent them assisting in formulating
a practical plan for it. The case for African unity 1s very strong
and the instinct of the mass of the people right.

It is only when the artificial boundaries that divide her are
broken down so as to provide for viable economic units, and
ultimately a single African unit, that Africa will be able to
develop industrially, for her own sake, and ultimately for the
sake of a healthy world economy. A common currency is
needed and communications of all kinds must be developed to
allow the free flow of goods and services.

The Economic Commission for Africa has repeatedly empha-
sised the need for economic planning on a continental scale.
The inadequacy of national planning can be demonstrated by
a glance at the economies of, for example, Mali, the Upper
Volta, Niger and Uganda. These land-locked States, which
export large quantities of food products to other African States,
cannot remain indifferent to the agricultural self-sufficiency
schemes adopted by their neighbours. Similarly, a national
government planning the establishment of a new industry
may find that a neighbouring State is developing one
like it. Such duplication would probably result in wasted
resources if each was depending on exporting its surplus to its
neighbour.

Few would argue against the need for economic planning on
a national scale. How much stronger is the argument for
continental planning. The modern trend is towards larger
economic and political units as interdependence of nations and
peoples grows. No country can be completely self-sufficient or
afford to ignore political events outside its borders. Africa is
clearly fragmented into too many small, uneconomic and non-
viable States, many of whom are having a very hard struggle to
survive. As already noted, others have had to cling to old ties
with former colonial rulers and have become easy prey to
nheo-colonialist forces. Some of them have found themselves,
whether they liked it or not, drawn into the cold war and into
the rivalries between foreign powers. The Congo is a notable
example.

Naturally, each national government is concerned primarily
with the welfare of its own citizens. It could only be expected
to agree to a policy of unification if the immediate and long-
term benefits became so apparent that it would be positively
damaging to its citizens not to co-operate. We are faced here
with the problem of uneven economic growth. Some African
countries are richer in natural resources than others. The less
fortunate will need reassuring that their interests will not suffer
at the hands of the more developed States.

Past economic union experience has not been encouraging.
The linking of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland benefited chiefly
Southern Rhodesia. Kenya has gained principally from the
East African Common Market, Uganda and Tanganyika being
at best only marginal gainers. In the former French colonial
federations the benefits of economic unity tended to centre in
Brazzaville, Abidjan and Dakar. These examples further
strengthen the argument for continentally-planned economic
growth so that all States can benefit from industrialisation and
other improvements made possible by unified direction. The
richer countries will be able to help the poorer. Resources can
be pooled and development projects co-ordinated to raise the
living standards of every African.

The time factor is important. As ECA has pointed out, now
is the time to act, before each State gets too deeply involved in
major investment and structural decisions based on narrow,
national markets. With each month that passes, the foreign
interests of neo-colonialism get a tighter grip on Africa’s
economic life.

The comparatively recent penetration of American big
business into Africa points once again to the danger from
neo-colonialism. So also does the combining of large firms to
form powerful monopolies. How can some of our smaller States
hope to bargain successfully with powerful foreign combines
some of which control financial empires worth more than the
State’s total revenue? The smaller the State, and the more
formidable the foreign interests, the less likely are the condi-
tions for economic independence to be met. For example,
Ghana, because of its economic size and alternative industries,
has been in a stronger position for bargaining with the alu-
minium companies than much smaller, and economically more
limited Togo can hope to be in dealing with French phosphate
interests. The domination of Africa’s economy by foreign firms
must be ended if we are to achieve rounded economic growth,
and this can only be done through unified action.

Something in the nature of an economic revolution is
required. Our development has been held back for too long by
the colonial type economy. We need to reorganise entirely so
that each country can specialise in producing the goods and
crops for which it is best suited.

With economic unity, those countries in Africa which are
beginning to establish modern industries would benefit
from wider markets. We would all be in a better bargaining
position to obtain higher prices for our goods and to establish
adequate taxation of foreign factor earnings. In fact, a whole
new pattern of economic development would be made possible.
Agriculture could be modernised more quickly with more
capital at its disposal. Industries on a larger and more economic
scale could be planned. These could afford to make use of new
techniques involving heavy capital outlay. Smaller plants
planned to meet only national needs are likely to have higher
costs, and are eventually less able to reduce costs than optimum-
sized units.

National planning bodies would still have a very important
part to play in a unified Africa. They would, for example,
supply essential information about local conditions, but their
work would be made easier with the experienced advice and
help of a single planning body keeping an eye on Africa’s
interests as a whole. The research and training in development
projects already being carried out by the ECA Development
Institute in Dakar would be strengthened to serve both the
continental and national bodies. Expensive failures due to lack
of co-ordination would be avoided. A case in point is the Inga
dam project which is to provide power for a sugar refinery, a
plastics and hardboard (from sugar cane waste) complex in
Bangui, which in turn will ship bulk plastics to a plastic
Products industry in Brazzaville. Obviously there should be a
Planning body able to phase and harmonise construction timing
for the Brazzaville and Bangui plants, the power lines from
Inga to Bangui and Brazzaville, and the transportation services
between Bangui and Brazzaville and the dam itself.

In the process of obtaining economic unity there is bound to
be much hard bargaining between the various States. Integra-
tion of different aspects of economic policy will proceed at
different rates, and there may be disappointing delays and
compromises to be worked out. But given the will to succeed,
difficulties can be resolved.

In general, the broader the front on which economic unity is
launched the quicker the goals and policies of a fully developed
Africa can be achieved. An all-African planning body could
take immediate steps towards the development of large-scale
industry and power; for the removal of barriers to inter-African
trade; and for the creation of a central bank and the formation
of a unified policy on all aspects of export control, tariff and
quota arrangements. The ECA has carried out several surveys
designed to provide information to help in the making of
decisions on these points.

Among immediate needs are the manufacture in Africa of
agricultural machinery of all kinds to speed up the modernisa- i
tion of agriculture. We need supplies of electrical equipment
for use in the growing electric power production essential for
industrial growth. Mining and industrial machinery must be
produced in Africa to lower the costs of developing our mineral
resources. Construction machinery and supplies, chemicals,
fertilisers, plastics, are all urgently required, and Africa must
produce them for her own requirements.

Reports of the ECA Industrial Co-ordination Missions to
different regions in Africa suggest that the production of iron
and steel, non-ferrous metals, engineering supplies, chemicals
and fertilisers, cement, paper and textiles should be developed
on an inter-African basis since their eficiency depends on large-
scale production. Other industries which can run efficiently on
a smaller scale can be planned nationally.

The location of the various industries will, of course, depend
on many factors such as the availability of power, mineral
deposits, nearness to processing plants, markets and so on.
Production of aluminium and copper, for example, will have to
be developed in those countries where the essential resources,
ore and cheap power, are available. The manufacturing of
aluminium and copper products, however, need not take place
in the countries producing the metals. Similarly, the production
of cotton is limited to certain climatic regions, while cotton
textile industries can be developed further afield.

Every African State has some contribution to make to the
economic whole. There are, for instance, no known deposits of
potash in West Africa, but requirements can be met from North
Africa, Ethiopia and possibly also from the Congo (Brazzaville)
and Gabon. Plans for nitrogeneous fertiliser production in
Zambia have already been worked out. The plant could be
supplied with coal from Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) and low-cost
power from the Victoria Falls. Kenya, with its large forest
reserves, could become the centre of a wood distillation complex
able to supply the countries of East and Central Africa with
gas, acetone, methanol and tar. There are many other examples
too numerous to describe.

The urgent need to plan industrial development on a
continental scale must not, however, blind us to the equally
important need to do the same for agriculture, fishing and
forestry. In The Role of Industry in Development: some Fallacies,
Dudley Seers has pointed out the inter-dependence of agri-
culture and industry:

‘Materials are needed for growing industries; more impor-
tant, the swelling town labour force needs to be fed, and this
implies that a rising surplus of food has to be produced in the
countryside. . . . To over-emphasise industry, as some
countries have found to their cost, leads paradoxically in the
end to a slower rate of industrialisation.’

African States are importing larger amounts of food than ever
before from abroad. This trend must be stopped by a carefully
planned expansion of our own agriculture.

As an industry, there can be specialisation so that each region
or State concentrates on producing the agricultural products for
which it is best suited. For instance, it is wasteful for each West
African State to try to be self-sufficient in rice when Senegal’s
Casamance district would be well able to supply the need.
Equally, Mali and the Upper Volta are obvious exporters of
fresh, tinned and processed meat, while coastal States would
supply fresh, tinned and smoked fish.

A further argument for a unified agricultural policy is implied
in the need to step up efforts to combat many of the obstacles to
economic growth. Locusts, the tse-tse fly and plant diseases are
no respecters of political frontiers. Research into their control
would benefit from a pooling of brain power and technical
know-how. So also would medicine and social services. How
much greater the chance of wiping out major epidemic diseases
like river blindness and sleeping sickness if action against them
is co-ordinated and unified.

The advantage of unified military and diplomatic policies,
both for our own security and to achieve freedom for every part
of Africa, are so obvious as to need no comment.

Transport and communications are also sectors where unified
planning is needed. Roads, railways, waterways, air-lines must
be made to serve Africa’s needs, not the requirements of foreign
interests. Communications between African States are quite
inadequate. In many cases it is still easier to travel from an
airport in Africa to Europe or America than to go from one
African State to another.

Economic unity to be effective must be accompanied by
political unity. The two are inseparable, each necessary for the
future greatness of our continent, and the full development of
our resources. There are several examples of major unions of
States in the world today. In Africa Must Unite I described
some of the more important ones, and warned against the
danger of regional federations in Africa.

Africa today is the main stamping ground of the neo-
colonialist forces that seek the domination of the world for the
imperialism they serve. Spreading from South Africa, the
Congo, the Rhodesias, Angola, Mozambique, they form a
maze-like connection with the mightiest international financial
monopolies in the world. These monopolies are extending their
banking and industrial organisations throughout the African
continent. Their spokesmen push their interests in the parlia-
ments and governments of the world and sit on the international
bodies that are supposed to exist for the promotion of world
eace and the welfare of the less-developed countries. Against
such a formidable phalanx of forces, how can we move? Cer-
tainly not singly, but in a combination that will give strength to
our bargaining power and eliminate so many of the duplications
that give greater force and greater advantage to the imperialists
and their strategy of neo-colonialism.

Decolonisation is a word much and unctuously used by
imperialist spokesmen to describe the transfer of political con-
trol from colonialist to African sovereignty. The motive spring
of colonialism, however, still controls the sovereignty. The
young countries are still the providers of raw materials, the old
of manufactured goods. The change in the economic relation-
ship between the new sovereign states and the erstwhile masters
is only one of form. Colonialism has achieved a new guise. It
has become neo-colonialism, the last stage of imperialism; its
final bid for existence, as monopoly-capitalism or imperialism
is the last stage of capitalism. And neo-colonialism is fast
entrenching itself within the body of Africa today through the
consortia and monopoly combinations that are the carpet-
baggers of the African revolt against colonialism and the urge
for continental unity.

These interests are centred on the mining companies of
South and Central Africa. From mining they ramify into an
involved pattern of investment companies, manufacturing con-
cerns, transport, public utility organisations, oil and chemical
industries, nuclear installations and many other undertakings
too numerous to mention. Their enterprises spill across the vast
African continent and over the oceans into North America,
Australia, New Zealand, Asia, the Caribbean, South America,
the United Kingdom, Scandinavia and most of western Europe.

Connections, direct and indirect, are maintained with many
of the giants of American industry and finance. They are
supported by leading bankers, financiers and industrialists in
the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Germany, America and
elsewhere. The rotas of their directorates are filled with names
that have a familiar ring for those who have the least knowledge
of international finance and industry. Names like Oppenheimer,
: Hambro, Drayton, Rothschild, d’Erlanger, Gillet, Lafond,
Robiliart, van der Straeten, Hochschild, Chester Beatty, Patino,
Engelhard, Timmins are ubiquitous. Others, equally powerful
in the interests they dominate, avoid the publicity of lengthy
lists of their directorships, either by complete absence from the
pages of directories anxious to advertise their glories, or by
coyly hiding their eminence behind a lonely announcement
with name and address.

These intricate inter-connections of the great imperialist
monopolies expose the real forces that are behind world events.
They indicate also the pattern which links those events to the
developing countries at different points of the globe. They
reveal the duality of the interests that force the developing
countries to import goods and services which are the products
of companies combined in the monopoly groups directly
exploiting their natural resources or intimately associated with
them. This is the double edge to the guillotine that cuts off
Africa’s wealth from Africa, to the greater enrichment of the
countries which absorb her primary materials and return them
to her in the form of finished products.

In their new-found independence, it is to these very same
monopolistic groups that the new African States are obliged to
turn to supply the requirements arising from the need to lay the
foundations for their economic transformation. The policy of
non-alignment, whenever it is exercised, imposes the obligation
to ‘shop around’, but since capitalism has come to the peak of
monopoly, it is impossible for any of us to avoid dealing with
monopoly in some form or another. But it is in the nature of our
arrangements with the monopolies that the freedom or other-
wise of the African States lies. Where we establish and maintain
the integrity of our financial institutions and keep our basic
projects free from imperialist control, we leave ourselves room
to manoeuvre away from the neo-colonialism that, unfortu-
nately, has closed its grip upon countries whose independence
is over-shadowed by a heavy reliance upon extra-African
associations. In this atmosphere of relative freedom, the giant
combines that open up industrial enterprises on our soil do so
on arrangements that are well screened and are part of
nationally planned advancement. The national banks are really
national banks, formed and run out of the country’s own
resources, and our other financial and economic institutions are
arded against neo-colonialist infiltration.

Unhappily, these conditions are rare in Africa. Most of the
territories pass into the state of national sovereignty in unviable
circumstances that inhibit even a modicum of free movement
within national limits. They could be overcome, but only
within the combined strength that continental unity and a
central connective socialist policy, free of attachments to other
continents, could give. As things are, most of our new States,
alarmed at the prospect of the harsh world of poverty, disease,
ignorance and lack of financial and technical resources into
which they are thrust from the womb of colonialism, are
reluctant to cut the cord that holds them to the imperialist
mother. Their hesitancy is fostered by the sugared water of aid,
which is the stop-gap between avid hunger and the hoped-for
greater nourishment that never comes. As a result, we find that
imperialism, having quickly adopted its outlook to the loss of
direct political control, has retained and extended its economic
grip (and thereby its political compulsion) by the artfulness of
neo-colonialist insinuation.

The increasing expansion of productive capacity and potential
output of the advanced capitalist countries has its corollary in
the necessity to export on a geometrically increasing scale the
finished products of industry and the excess capital that could
only further inflate competition at home, but brings rapid and
high returns from the industrially-starved new nations. Hence
the fevered jostling for position in these areas as well as in that
of raw materials monopoly, which is using Africa as the play-
ground, not only of the cold war (an aspect of the fight of
capitalism for existence against socialism), but of the com-
petitive struggle of international monopoly. North American
Imports into Africa rose from 10-3 per cent in 1959 to 13-7 per
Cent in 1962, while those from other western countries and
Japan remained the same or declined slightly. This corresponds
to the increasing American investments in the continent’s
€xtractive industries and the growth of United States participa-
ion in financial establishments on this continent. American
banking houses are making inroads into territories formerly
catered for solely by European and British banks. The French
banks still dominate in the former French countries and the
Belgians in the Congo; but this is frequently a front for
American participation.

European financial advisers constantly counsel the African
countries on the advantages that they can receive from remain-
ing in association with the erstwhile ‘mother country’, while
depreciating the possibilities of inter-African association. Much
subtlety is employed by Lombard, the commentator of the
Financial Times. In an article which appeared in the issue of
6 February 1964 of this influential London newspaper, a
product of an industrial holding company which also produces
The Economist, Lombard asserted that ‘there is not much that
African countries can do directly to help one another financially
at this stage of their economic evolution’. He is therefore ‘glad
to see that the independent African countries are now coming
to recognise that it is very much in their own interests to
preserve the monctary ties with leading European countries
they inherited from their colonial days. . . . They obviously
entertained strong suspicion that the enthusiasm their old
mother countries were displaying for allowing them to remain
within their monetary areas was motivated largely, if not
wholly, by consideration of self-interest. And they are inclined
to assume that this implied that their own purpose would be
served. best by following up political independence with its
financial equivalent at the earliest possible opportunity’.

Lombard assured his readers that the Africans showed
wisdom when the secretariat of E.C.A., assisting the Organisa-
tion of African Unity to implement its resolution on the possi-
bility of establishing an African clearing house and payments
union, had the good sense ‘to seek the advice of the distin-
guished American monetary authority, Professor Triffin of
Yale University’. Need we be surprised that in his report the
distinguished American professor pointed out that ‘it would be
most unwise lightly to condemn or break up financial arrange-
ments with major trading companies and financial centres’.
This, of course, we might consider neo-colonialist penetration,
but to Lombard it is only one side of the picture. For there are
two worlds, and the African countries ‘should now strive to get
the best of both worlds, by maintaining and even further
developing the relations they have with the major international
monetary areas and at the same time building their own
financial self-help mechanisms’. How it is possible to resolve
two contradictions Lombard does not volunteer to explain, but
what he does confess is that this unresolvable two-way pro-
cedure ‘would meet with nothing but the fullest approval from
their (African) present monetary area associates’.

This says plenty and we have no difficulty in believing what
it says, for the simple fact is that those who control the major
international monetary areas are placing their time bombs
within the ‘self-help mechanisms’ of the African countries. For
these mechanisms are controlled by the financial monopolists of
imperialism, the bankers and financiers who have been very
busy in the past few years setting up establishments throughout
Africa, infiltrating into the economic heart of many countries
and linking with the most important enterprises that are being
established to exploit the continent’s natural resources on a
larger scale than ever before for their own private gain.

Though the aim of the neo-colonialists is economic domina-
tion, they do not confine their operations to the economic
sphere. They use the old colonialist methods of religious,
educational and cultural infiltration. For example, in the inde-
pendent States, many expatriate teachers and ‘cultural
ambassadors’ influence the minds of the young against their
own country and people. They do this by undermining confi-
dence in the national government and social system through
exalting their own notions of how a State should be run, and
forget that there is no monopoly of political wisdom.

But all this indirect subversion is as nothing compared with
the brazen onslaught of international capitalists. Here is
empire’, the empire of finance capital, in fact if not in name,
a vast sprawling network of inter-continental activity on a
highly diversified scale that controls the lives of millions of
People in the most widely separated parts of the world, manipu-
lating whole industries and exploiting the labour and riches of
nations for the greedy satisfaction of a few. Here resides the
mainspring of power, the direction of policies that stand against
the advancing tide of freedom of the exploited people of Africa
and the world. Here is the adamantine enemy of African inde-
pendence and unity, braced in an international chain of
common interest that regards the likely coming together of the
new nations as a major blow at its continued domination of the
resources and economies of others. Here, indeed, are the real
workings of neo-colonialism. Here indeed are the economic
ramifications of the monopolies and combines. Their financial
and economic empires are pan-African and they can only be
challenged on a pan-African basis. Only a united Africa through
an All-African Union Government can defeat them.

3. Imperialist finance

THESE are the hard facts of the African situation today, a
process that has continued and grown since the invasion of
Africa by the European and foreign powers. It has gained
tremendous momentum in recent years with the growth of the
struggle between the imperialist antagonists and between
capitalism and socialism.

Imperialism was analysed by Lenin as the highest stage of
capitalism. His exposition was written in the middle of the first
world war (1916), which was waged to determine the first major
revision of imperialist supremacy. He traced the unequal
development of capitalism which caused the latecomers like
Germany and the United States to form into cartels and
syndicates before the earlier starters, and so brought them
sooner to a higher stage of monopoly from which they chal-
lenged each other and the rest of world imperialism.

Monopoly capitalism by means of mergers, amalgamations,
patent agreements, selling arrangements, production quotas,
Price fixing, and a variety of other common contrivances, had
built itself into an international confraternity. However, be-
Cause of its competitive character, rooted in the principle of
production for private gain and the unequal development of
Capitalism, the struggle of the monopolies went on within the
international combinations. The conflicts between the European
and American financial and industrial trusts and combines for
a redivision of the world’s resources of raw materials and
markets for investment capital and manufactured goods,
exploded into war when they became too intense to contain
within the limits of diplomacy. The 1914-18 war brought a re-
division of the globe’s colonial sectors. At the same time it
created the opportunity for a socialist break in the chain of
imperialism that encircled the world.

A heavy blow was dealt to international monopoly capitalism
with the triumph of the Russian October Revolution. From
then on it was faced not only with the struggle for hegemony
within its own ranks but, which was much worse, it was forced
to engage in a defensive struggle against an opposing ideology.
That ideology had achieved a signal success in withdrawing a
sixth of the earth’s surface from monopoly capitalism’s field of
operations, a fact which it has never and will never forgive,
and was threatening to undermine imperialism’s power at other
strategic spots which had softened under the blows of war.
With the failure of interventionist war to subdue the new
socialist State, a cordon sanitaire was raised around the Soviet
Union to prevent the spread of socialist contamination to other
parts of Europe. Fascism was encouraged to prop capitalism
at points where it had been seriously damaged and was faced
with popular discontent, as in Germany and Italy, and to
bolster it in those outposts which were and remain semi-
colonial appendages to Western imperialism, Spain and
Portugal.

These devices, however, were unable to cope with the re-
current crises that were tearing at the very heart of capitalism
and sharpening the bitter contentions between rival imperial-
isms which erupted into a second global war in 1939. From
this holocaust, socialism emerged as a much more threatening
challenge to imperialism than ever before. At the same time
we, the peoples of imperialism’s ‘far flung empires’, had come
to realise that we could have control over our own destiny and
began to make our bid for independent nationhood. Thus
imperialism came to be challenged on another front, the
colonialist front, at a time when science had heightened the
capabilities of the productive machinery of capitalism, thereby
increasing its need for raw materials and markets for new
chemically-produced primary materials, manufactured goods
and overseas employment of growing capital surpluses.
Challenged thus by anti-colonialism and socialism, imperialism
is now engaged in a ‘to-the-death’ trial for survival against the
forces that are antagonistic to it and that are building up across
the globe even while the internecine struggle within itself is
becoming more and more brutal. In this multi-sided struggle,
imperialism has been forced into the use of many artifices to
maintain itself in being by continuing the colonialist process
without the benefit of colonial control.

The great colonial powers were able to monopolise external
trade and agricultural and industrial primary materials pro-
duction in their respective subject territories. The colonies of
such a lesser industrialised nation as Portugal, however, which
has for centuries been a pawn of Britain and became a semi-
colony of British finance, were dominated by British capital,
together with the international banking groups with which it
is associated. Belgian financial domination of the Congo,
because of the close connections of Belgian banking institutions
with such international houses as Rothschild, Lazard Fréres,
and Schroder in their turn linked with the Morgan and
Rockefeller groups, was shared with British, French and
American finance.

The tribute drawn off by way of colonial and semi-colonial
exploitation enabled the capitalist classes of the metropolitan
countries to pass some of the crumbs to their working classes
and thereby buy them off (especially the trade union and
political leaders) when the class conflicts in their societies
got critical. At the same time, the competition for sources
of raw materials, and the export of capital and commodities
intensified as productive methods improved and goods
Came out of the factories on a more and more massive
scale.

The uneven development of capitalism brought new con-
tenders into the field who joined in the rivalries that had
grown up with the original scramble for colonies. These
deepened until they erupted in the two world wars, which,
Notwithstanding all the pious claptrap about their being wars
fought for the maintenance of democracy were, in reality, wars
fought for the redivision of the world by monopoly capitalism,
‘War’, Clausewitz has told us, ‘is the continuation of policy by
other means.’ What the powerful trusts were unable to achieve
by ‘peaceful’ competition, their domination over larger and
larger areas of the world, they embroiled their countries into
military action to achieve for them. This not only gives them
a wider sphere of exclusive operation but undermines the
power of competing monopolies.

This redivision of the world is not confined to the less
developed sectors but extends to highly industrialised areas.
The important industrialised region of Alsace Lorraine was a
coveted prize of the German invasions of France in the wars
of 1871 and 1939. Hitler’s campaign against Czechoslovakia
was inspired by the desire to annex the highly developed
manufactories of Bohemia and Moravia to the German trusts,
French capitalists long looked with watering mouths at the rich
coal mines and chemical and other industries of the Saar, so
close to the iron ore range of Lorraine, and seized the oppor-
tunity of the 1919 peace arrangements to appropriate them to
France as a reparations award. A later plebiscite won the Saar
back to Germany. After the second world war, agreement
between the de Wendel-Schneider-Krupp trusts achieved a
customs union between the German State of the Saar and
France, which actually makes the Saar a dependency of the
de Wendel coal and steel empire.

World war two ended in the defeat of Hitler and a temporary
rebuff to German capitalism, which had to submit to a revital-
ising injection of American monopoly finance. At the same
time an upheaval was taking place in the colonial world such
as to make Winston Churchill remark that he had not been
made Prime Minister of Britain to preside over the liquidation
of the British Empire. All the fair, brave words spoken about
freedom that had been broadcast to the four corners of the
earth took seed and grew where they had not been intended.
Colonial emancipation became the dominating phenomenon
of the mid-twentieth century, just as abolition of slavery was
of the corresponding period of the nineteenth, with just as
crucial consequences in national and international politics and
economics.

Post-war capitalism, which had already received one devas-
tating blow after the first world war in the rise of the Soviet
Union, took another crushing defeat in the establishment of
socialist regimes in a number of countries in central and eastern
Europe and in China. Large sources of raw materials and
financial investment and commodity markets were withdrawn
from its field of exploitation. Domestic reconstruction at first
occupied the attention of the European countries. The United
States, having already achieved a tremendous headstart by its
late intervention into the war, its physical immunity from
attack, and the enormous spurt given to its productive and
inventive capacity as a main supplier of war materials and
services, took over from Britain the leading role in international
financial monopoly.

As a result of its primacy in the financial sphere, United
States foreign policy turned in a completely opposite direction
from its pre-war position of ‘splendid isolation’ to one of
domination in world affairs. The outcropping of new States
from colonial submergence raised the pivotal problem of how
to retain these countries within the colonial relationship once
open control was removed. Thus has opened up a new phase
in imperialism, that of the adaptation of colonialism to the new
condition of the elimination of political over-lordship of
colonial powers, the phase in which colonialism is to be
maintained by other means.

_ This is not to say that the old outright form of colonialism
1s completely scrapped. There is plenty of evidence to show
how tenaciously imperial powers cling to their colonial terri-
tories. Vietnam, Korea, Suez, Algeria, are all examples of
how far imperialist nations will go to hold on physically to
Colonies, an attitude reinforced by the interference of America
as a leading protagonist in the struggle for the world monopolist
Control of finance capital. This struggle has been given an
Ideological content by invoking anti-communism as the main-
spring of the battle to bring the socialist sector of the globe
back into the exploitive control of Western financial monopoly.

Cuba is the outstanding example of the extremist lengths to
which these power groups will go in the effort to reimpose |
their grip where they have been ejected and to maintain what
they consider a strategic bastion in the struggle for the renewal |
of dominion over the socialist anti-imperialist world.

Control of fuel resources is a prime motivator in the frantic
competition between monopolies. The Saar was bandied be-
tween France and Germany because of its important coal |
resources. Similarly, the battle for oil has gone on since before
the first world war. Middle Eastern oil, in fact, became an
important objective of that war, and the struggle continued
after the war by diplomatic and economic means inside the
national boundaries and on the international plane. Rockefeller
supremacy in oil has been stoutly contested by the Morgan
groups, which have extended their influence by breaking into
the Anglo-Dutch holdings, a one-time preserve of the
Rothschilds, Lazard Fréres, the Deutsche Bank, and their j
associates.

The frenzied battle for oil monopoly has been a cardinal
factor in the suppression of popular movements in colonial
and semi-colonial areas of the Near, Middle and Far East, in
Latin America and North Africa. The series of events in Iran,
Iraq, Kuwait, Aden, Saudi Arabia, Cuba, Venezuela, Brazil,
Brunei, and Algeria, that have erupted in violence, revolution
and war have been largely stimulated by the struggle for
control of oil. Oil finds in European centres, such as Groningen
in Holland, have drawn the competition into well industrialised
centres, just as the competition for coal and iron did.

Competition between the oil combines is not confined to
production, but extends into the distribution of petroleum
products and the new by-product industry of petro-chemicals.
A fierce struggle is going on all over the world as a result of
the sharp increase in the quantity of oil consumed and the
territorial expansion of consumption. The oil industry has
from its outset been dominated by the most powerful banking |
interests, the Rockefellers, Morgans, Rothschilds, because of
the spiralling profits it provides. Today, even with the larger
royalties the oil combines have been obliged to pay to the oil-
producing countries, their profits are still mounting prodigi-
ously.

Oil trust reserves run into billions. Much has been used in
investments abroad, America far and away exceeding all others.
To financial reserves from oil must be added those amassed
from metal and other raw materials’ monopolies; from monopoly
of food supplies and vast industrial and agricultural empires;
from the monopoly network of distribution and distributive
agencies; from military preparations and the several wars that
have been fought with colonial peoples since the end of the
second world war; from the development of nuclear instru-
ments of destruction and the frenzied race for leadership in the
realm of space research.

Capitalism contains many paradoxes, all of them based in
the concept of commodity production: the few rich and the
many poor; poverty and hunger amid superabundance;
‘freedom from hunger’ campaigns and subsidies for restriction
of crop output. But perhaps the most ludicrous is the constant
traffic in the same kinds of goods, products and commodities
between countries. Everyone is busy, as it were, taking in the
other’s washing. This is not done out of need, but out of the
compulsion of profit-making and monopoly extension. The
European Common Market has become the apotheosis of this
process, as well as the dumping ground of international invest-
ment, dominated by the giant American banking concerns and
their British satellites.

The European Community, of which the European Com-
mon Market is only one aspect, is by no means a new concept.
It was foreshadowed by Hobson in his critique of imperialism
as ‘a European federation of great powers which, so far from
forwarding the cause of world civilisation, might introduce the
gigantic peril of western parasites, a group of advanced in-
dustrial nations, whose upper classes drew vast tribute from
Asia and Africa, with which they supported great masses
of retainers, no longer engaged in the staple industries of
agriculture and manufacture, but kept in the performance of
Personal or minor industrial services under the control of a
hew financial aristocracy.’ It is collective imperialism.

This is precisely what has happened. Competition between
the monopolies has produced the phenomenon of vast advertis-
ing and public relations organisations which busy themselves
selling not only goods and services but personalities as well.
These organisations and the media through which they operate
—the press, radio, cinema, television—and the businesses
dealing with the packaging of goods, employ huge armies of
people in what are nothing more than parasitic jobs which
would have no place in a sane society producing for con-
sumption instead of profit. As things are, enormous sums are
invested and earned by the financial interests that participate
in the promotion of these enterprises.

But this is only a tiny facet of the fevered financial activity
which is going on today in the capitalist world. Every week,
every day, with almost monotonous regularity, we see the same
names repeating themselves as bidders for large companies;
as underwriters and issuers of new shares or holders of
debentures; as combiners in new financial institutions for
more universal methods of investment; as participants in new
factories and ventures that will extend monopoly in fresh
directions and more territories.

They are especially industrious in the countries of the ‘Six’
and others which still hope to push into the Common Market
as direct or associate members. The lowering of trade barriers
was the signal for their entry. For practical purposes, some of
the key European countries are financial servants of the
dominant banking monopolist groups, the Morgans and the
Rockefellers. Despite all the power pertaining to such im-
portant banks as the Société Générale de Belgique, Banque de
Bruxelles, Kredietbank, Banque Lambert, to such important
industrial-finance groups as Solvay, Boel, Brufina-Cofinindus,
Petrofina—Belgium, with its appendage Luxemburg, is in
reality a financial colony of American investment capital.
Thirty-nine new companies were established in Belgium in
1959 by foreigners. In the year 1961 the number of new
‘foreign’ companies set up had grown to 237. Sums invested
from abroad had swollen from 2,457 million Belgian francs in
1959 to 6,664 million Belgian francs in 1961. Of this last figure,
almost 60 per cent, that is 3,979 million Belgian francs, was
furnished from American sources. Henry Coston, in his reveal-
ing book on the ramifications of banking finance, L’Europe des
Banquiers (p. 174), declares that this enterprise is not limited
to the territory of the kingdom, and that the Belgian ex-
colonies have not been ignored. ‘One might even ask if the
sanguinary events in the Congo were not caused by the
merciless struggle going on between rival financial groups’, he
concludes.

American finance capital, of course, had a field day in
Germany during the post-war occupation. German industry
and finance, already linked to American industry and finance
by cartel and trust arrangements, became even more heavily
penetrated by the powerful United States monopoly groups.
The giant German banks, Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank,
Diskonto Gesellschaft, Commerzbank; the mighty German
trusts, Krupp, Bayer, Badische Anilin & Soda Fabrik, Hoechst,
and Siemens are all strung to American capital and in many
ways subordinate to it. Italian banks and industry are in much
the same position. ‘The Banco Commerciale Italiano, Banco di
Roma, Mediobanca, Credito Italiano, all are in several ways
tied up with American finance capital either directly or in-
directly. Examples can be stretched across the world, to Japan,
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. This financial depend-
ence upon America has been put by Lord Bearsted, chairman
of M. Samuel & Co. at the 1963 annual meeting, when he
reported the 162 per cent acquisition of the company’s shares
by the Morgan group. ‘We will not be the first merchant bank
to have part of its capital owned by American interests’.

This piteous statement is a public confession of Europe’s
subservience to American financial monopoly, a monopoly
expressed in the strategic and political alliances that bind
European capitalism to American capitalism. European states-
men are deeply conscious of their inferior standing but, in the
main, feel there is little they can do to adjust the position.
Resentment, however, there is, and in France it has expressed
Itself in General de Gaulle’s stand on an individual French
nuclear striking force; in his overtures to Adenauer, former
German Chancellor; in his attempts to exclude Great
Britain from the Common Market as the long arm of the
United States; and more recently in the overtures to China and
his tour in Latin America. All these are efforts to arrest
America’s dominance of Europe and to exert French indepen-
dent action on the international front. Such attempts, however,
have little chance of success, nor can they make but a passing
impression upon the world scene. They are in reality expres-
sions of the deep competitive conflicts within capitalist-
imperialism, which exist below the surface federations and
alliances, conflicts rooted in the unequal development of the
contestants, in the unequal development of capitalism.

Britain, as the forerunner of the industrial revolution,
became the workshop of the world, the carrier of the world’s
goods, the foremost thruster for imperialist control from the
City of London. Her decline set in with the upsurge of the
younger, more vigorous capitalist States of Germany and
America. The two world wars were a test of their strength
against the older established capitalist countries and against
each other. The United States came out triumphant both
times. Still, the City of London is only slowly giving way to
Wall Street as the symbol of world money power. It hopes to
resuscitate itself by spreading into the European Common
Market, even though it must do so in alliance with, and sub-
ordination to, American financial monopoly. Surplus capital
in France was more heavily invested in the less advanced
countries of Europe—Russia, Poland, Hungary, Rumania—
than that of either Britain or Germany, although they, too,
had large investments in the same European heavy industries,
armaments, mines and oil fields. Everybody, however, turned
to the primary producing countries of the world, alienating
some as outright colonies under political rule, subserving and
exploiting others as spheres of investment on a semi-colonial
pattern.

Because of their late start, German and American capitalism
pressed forward with the amalgamation of industrial combines
and the monopoly of finance capital more hurriedly than did
either Britain and France, whose supremacy on the colonial
plane assured their hegemony, inter-related at several points
even while competitive, on the international financial level.
German financial monopoly took a beating in the defeat of
1918, when the colonial world was re-divided, and again in
1945. American capitalism on the other hand, owing to
geographical and territorial advantages (the last inherent in its
olitical union), continued to make rapid strides and was the
real victor of both world wars. Expansion of American financial
and industrial monopoly, however, was not confined to
Europe. The balance of western financial power began to tilt
towards Asia and Africa, a process that has been speeded up
since the end of the second world war, with the breakdown of
colonial rule.

The many consortia which are being established in the
majority of the new States revolve largely about the same
financial and industrial groups that have rooted themselves
firmly since the inception of colonial rule. Such changes as
there are correspond with the changes of influence that have
occurred within the groups themselves. The dominating
influence is held by the ubiquitous American formations of
Morgan and Rockefeller, with their British and European
associates following behind. Dying colonialism is reviving
in the international coalitions of neo-colonialism. These
coalitions of competing organisms reflect the global character
that financial monopoly has attained under the dominance of
the most powerful imperialism, that of America. They are also
a sign of the struggle for survival of the older imperialisms
against the fierce questing of the more powerful aggressiveness
of American imperialism, whose vaster productive force is
driving it outwards more and more.

Attempts are made to sweeten the well-known aims of
rapidly disintegrating political colonialism: the maintenance of
less developed areas of the world as the providers of cheap
Taw materials, spheres of investment, and markets for expen-
sive finished goods and services. The finished goods and
Services, now that the populations of the new nations are
asserting demands for a rising standard of life, are taking on a
fferent character and over-spilling into categories formerly
neglected. Land-clearing equipment, hydro-electrical projects,
road reconstruction, housing, schools, hospitals, harbours,
airports, and all the ancillary and supplementary services they
call for, are providing new fields of capital investment and
profit for financial monopoly, both at home and abroad. ‘They
are also keeping in handsomely paid employment a large army
of so-called experts, technical and professional people, not
always of the highest calibre.

New sources of extractive and agricultural commodities are
also attracting large capital investment sums. Former depend-
ence upon domestic sources of many minerals in the metro-
politan countries is giving place to their importation from
abroad. Miners in the copper and iron ore producing regions
of the United States, for example, are being thrown out of
work not only because of automation, but also because bigger
profits are being obtained from the greatly stepped-up mining
of base materials in Africa and Asia. In some places, their
semi-processing also offers greater margins than can be got in
the areas of more expensive labour. Puerto Rico and other
Latin American countries that offer cheap labour are fast
becoming centres of manufactured consumer goods, frequently
processed from imported raw materials and sent to the United
States to compete with American-produced commodities at
only slightly reduced, or the same, prices. This gives greater
profits still to finance capital.

The intricate process of balancing returns from domestic
investment against the outflow of capital into more profitable
foreign investment is creating serious rifts in the internal
economic position of every Western capitalist country. This is
felt particularly in the balance of payments position. Even the
United States, whose reserves of gold and foreign exchange
were so vast that they have carried her through a growing
outward current over a long period, has now reached the stage
when, like her less fortunate European counterparts, she is
herself entering upon an adverse balance of payments crisis.

Despite the rise in national production and increased
productivity, the problems of agriculture even in such rapidly
rising economies as Western Germany, Italy and France
bedevil the economic situation. In America, the farming small-
holder still lives close to and even below the poverty line,
while the extensive mechanised farms of banker-financed
companies are spoon-fed by a bankers’ Government. Guaran-
teed prices for produce that goes into government-paid and
overnment-built storages make large-scale farming in the
United States highly profitable to finance capital, which
passes on to the government the burdensome problem of what
to do with unsold surpluses resulting from high prices.

The need of further outlets for the products of agriculture
as well as of the industrial and commercial complexes that are
coming under increasing electronic control, and hence acquir-
ing a greatly increased potential, is forcing Western capitalism,
particularly American capitalism, into greater and more
intensive involvement in highly industrialised foreign countries.
The recent ‘chicken’ farce played out against the background
of de Gaulle’s anti-American policy which led Franco-German
opposition to a continuation of cheaper American poultry
importation into Europe, is just one of the lighter examples of
the fierce competition going on to unload the output of bank-
financed vigorously mechanised mass production. It high-
lighted for a moment the intrinsically paradoxical nature of
the European Market as a monopolistic organism putting up
a strong resistance to a dominant competitive monopoly. The
competitive tug-of-war is exemplified in the retaliative higher
tariffs that have now been put upon French and German
small cars imported into the United States, which have lost
their main advantage over the home produced article in the
consequent higher price.

Facts and figures prove that trade and investment between

. the highly industrialised countries are outpacing those with
- the less developed regions. They effectively support the case
that imperialism is not confined to the primary producing
Sectors of the world. However, the salient fact is that the
Profit rate from the exploitation of the less developed areas is

_ Sreater than that received from the more industrialised
Countries. In the latter, the competition between the monop-
-Olies is fiercest and domestic interests, even those which are
linked with international finance monopoly, all the time offer
the stoutest resistance to the invading ones. Yet, and this is
precisely due to their imperialist character, the dominating
world financial groups are able to make their constant incur-
sions into the national monopolies, and so deepen their
hegemony over larger and larger parts of the globe.

How much easier then it is for imperialist finance to edge
its way more and more into the developing countries where
colonial rule has broken, or is breaking, down. Under the
necessity of seeking greater and greater capital sums for
geological explorations and the opening up of new fields of
extractive materials, international finance was called to the aid
of the national finance of the respective imperialist countries.
This process was stimulated by the fact that the national
financial monopolies had already proceeded to the stage of
international alliance with the onset of imperialism, a process
that has manifoldly quickened in the present epoch of rising
nationalism and socialism. Thus, at this present time, all the
instruments and mechanics of international imperialism,
expressed in monopoly coalitions, are brought to bear in a
general descent upon the new, needy countries.

This new wave of predatory invasion of former colonies
operates behind the international character of the agencies
employed: financial and industrial consortia, assistance organ-
isations, financial aid bodies, and the like. Friendly co-operation
is offered in the educational, cultural and social domains, aimed
at subverting the desirable patterns of indigenous progress to
the imperialist objectives of the financial monopolists. These
are the latest methods of holding back the real development of
the new countries. These are the paraphernalia of neo-
colonialism, superficially proffering aid and guidance; sub-
terraneously benefiting the interested donors and _ their
countries in old and new ways.

There are several definitions of ‘aid’, as B. Chango Machyo
in his Aid and Neo-Colonialism has pointed out.

‘The definition varies with different blocs. Thus the U.N.
has its own definition, the imperialist camp has its own, so
has the socialist camp, and probably the non-aligned camp
might also have one. But, generally speaking, there are two
main definitions: one by the U.N. and another as understood
by the so-called donor countries. According to the U.N.,
“economic aid consists only of outright grants and long-
term lending, for non-military purposes, by Government
and international organisations”. But the so-called aid-
giving countries include in the term “aid”, private capital
investment and export credits, even for relatively short
periods, as well as loans for military purposes.’

As Professor Benham in Economic Aid to Underdeveloped
Countries remarks: ‘It is pleasant to feel that you are helping
your neighbours, and at the same time increasing your own
profits.’ Before the decline of colonialism what today is known
as aid was simply foreign investment.

4. Monopoly capitalism and the
American dollar

 

THE ‘end of empire’ has been accompanied by a flourishing of
other means of subjugation. The British Empire has become
the Commonwealth, but the proceeds from the exploitation of
British imperialism are increasing. Profits of British tin com-
panies have ranged as high as 400 per cent. The latest dividends
to British diamond shareholders are close to 350 per cent. On
one occasion Mr Nehru declared that British profits from inde-
pendent India had more than doubled and British capital
investment in his country rose from Rs. 2,065 m. in 1948 to
Rs, 4,460 m. in 1960. Total British investments in Africa have
soared to $6,500 m., the French to about $7,000 m. and
American to $1,100 m. A recent survey made plain the plunder
of British monopolies. It listed 9 out of 20 of Britain’s biggest
monopolies as direct colonial exploiting companies: Shell,
British Petroleum, British American Tobacco, Imperial
Tobacco, Burmah Oil, Nchanga Copper, Rhokana Corporation,
Rhodesian Mines and British South Africa, five of which are
directly engaged in chiselling away Africa’s natural resources.
The others are busily increasing their trading. Their total
of £221 m. net profits was over half the combined net
profits of the top twenty monopolies. Incredibly the list
leaves out two of the world’s greatest combines, those states
within a state—Unilever and Imperial Chemical Industries
—whose operations are based heavily in their overseas ex-
ploitations. The United Africa Company leads for Unilever in
Africa; about a third of I.C.I. and its subsidiaries operate
overseas.

Sir Alec Douglas Home, former Prime Minister of Britain’s
Tory government, in a speech made on 20 March 1964, pro-
fessed himself ignorant of the meaning of neo-colonialism.
While Sir Alec was talking, Britain was engaged in what its
ress was busy describing as ‘major crisis areas’ all over the
world, putting down ‘troubles’ inspired and perpetrated by
neo-colonialism: Aden and Southern Arabia against Yemen;
Borneo and Sarawak against Indonesia; Cyprus, British Guiana;
‘maintaining law and order’ in Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda, for
the recently independent governments. Is this the end of
imperialism? Not according to The Economist, mouthpiece of
Britain’s business interests, which felt compelled to comment:

‘Military bases, routes to the East, frontier skirmishing,
putting down mutinies—all this has a nineteenth-century
ring quite naturally disturbing to those who had hoped that
the end of colonialism meant the end of military involvement
east of Suez. The knobbly truth of the matter turns out to be
that for the moment Britain has as many military commit-
ments in that area as it ever had before colonies were replaced
by Commonwealth.’ (Economist, 23 May 1964.)

The intention is to hold back the progress of the developing
countries. Where circumstances favour the establishment of
ventures of a more than token industrial character, the aim is to
see that they are made haltingly. The over-riding objective is to
induce a merely fractional increase in the industrial scope of the
new nations in order that they may continue to provide the
sinews of imperialism’s greater concentration of forces for the
final tussle of strength within itself and against socialism. What
1s remarkable is that the major part of the less developed world,
and here we must include the U.S.S.R., chose and is choosing
the socialist road to national progress. There are, in addition,
countries like India where the political system, though patterned
On the bourgeois democracies of capitalism, nevertheless pro-
claims socialism as the socio-economic objective. The nations
that have reached their present peaks by passing through the
various stages of capitalism cling desperately to the system that
has brought them to the heights of imperialism. Each, perched
perilously on a narrow summit, must put up a constant battle to
guard its own pinnacle.

Greater intensity is infused into the struggle by the resur-
gence of rivals, of whom Germany and Japan are the most
virile. Both of them have benefited from strong injections of
American capital, and U.S. monopolies are drawing off con-
siderable profits from the running that is being made by these
two countries in world competition, pointing the contradictions
among the interests involved. Competing against American
imperialism, German and Japanese monopolists are frequently
in alliance with their U.S.A. opposites, who often put them
forward in imperialism’s general offensive against Africa, where
open United States private investment might be regarded with
more suspicion than others. Germany, moreover, is now second
to the U.S.A. in the scale of so-called assistance to the develop-
ing countries. Since capitalism is the embodiment of the
philosophy of self-interest, the ostensible allies of America’s
monopolists must use the position of strength into which they
are being thrust to promote their own growth.

This struggle for ascendancy among the imperialisms is
continuous and involves a constant search for renewal of the
sinews of strength. Alongside the battle for imperialist
supremacy, there wages the fight against the ideological camp
of socialism, into which the warring imperialists make an all-out
effort to trail the developing countries as their appendages. In
this way the anti-communist campaign is used to further
imperialist aims. Leaders of monopoly capitalism everywhere
build up in the public mind an image of the system in socio-
cultural terms by which they transform it into an idealised
harmonious civilisation that must be cherished at all costs.
They harp upon a way of life that may be altered only to its
detriment, and stress its continuity as a major principle in the
fight against communism. When Harold Macmillan as Prime
Minister of Britain told the South African parliament that ‘what
is now on trial is much more than our military strength or our
diplomatic and administrative skill—it is our way of life’, he
epitomised the metaphysical transmutation of economic im-
ulses into a social philosophy. This, in spite of his reference
to ‘winds of change’ blowing across Africa. He echoed the
several statesmen of the West, any of whom could have made
the statement and, indeed, have at different times and in almost
identical words, “The great issue in this second half of the
twentieth century is whether the uncommitted peoples of Asia
and Africa will swing to the East or to the West.’ All the

owerful imperialist nations are decided that the new States
shall develop along the capitalist path, the provisioners of
imperialism’s vital needs, the source of its super profits.
National liberation and the obvious advantages of socialist
development for nations evolving out of a colonialist domina-
tion and without the capital means for making that develop-
ment, are major factors determining imperialist strategy towards
these nations, in both the interests of its internal struggle and
in the fight against socialism.

All countries, even the most deeply involved in monopoly
imperialism, have a State sector. Indeed, State involvement in
private economy has become an essential part of its process. It
should cause no surprise, therefore, that developing countries,
particularly in view of the small accumulations of local private
capital, are obliged to centralise their economies. The size of
the State sector and its planned expansion, however, must
depend on the economic system which is chosen, capitalist or
socialist. The aim of the imperialist powers, in the application
of their aid programmes, is to turn the State sector into an
appendage of private capital. In view of the process that has
been evolved in the imperialist countries, it would be surprising
if this were not so. The declared basic policy of the Agency for
International Development (formerly International Co-opera-
tion Administration) is ‘to employ United States assistance to
aid-receiving countries in such a way as will encourage the
development of the private sectors of their economies. Thus,
I.C.A. will normally not be prepared to finance publicly owned
industrial and extractive enterprises, although it is realised that
there may be exceptions. .. .’

Development in the new countries along non-capitalistic lines
must be frustrated in the interests of Western imperialism. A
series of articles which appeared in The (London) Times in
April 1964 outlined the pattern and made no secret of its
reasons: “The two great objects of Britain’s foreign policy must
be to prevent the non-communist world from being penetrated
by Communism .. . and secondly, to prevent her own access to
trade and investment in any part of the world from being barred
or limited.’ Naturally enough, as the articles conclude, ‘both
these objects lead straight into the ‘‘neo-colonial” issue—the
struggle for influence, commercial and political, over the non-
communist countries outside Europe and North America’. Thus
succintly does the writer in The Times expose the true character
of the ideological struggle between monopolies. Leading this
ideological struggle, because she leads the inter-imperialist
struggle, is the U.S.A. As the world’s leading imperialist
power, America lays successor claim to the so-called vacua which
the retiring colonial powers are said to leave behind as they
give way to nationalist governments. Vietnam and Congo are
very obvious symbols of this policy of rabid neo-colonialism.
They are also examples of bitter antagonisms between American
and other imperialisms. According to France Observateur (issue
of 4 June 1964), “The darkest accusations are made by the
U.S. against French business circles operating in S. Vietnam.
... American experts in Asian affairs assert that French planters
are not content with paying their mite to the South Vietnam
National Liberation Front. They will even lend assistance and
hide the guerillas pursued by the Government’s army.’

In spite of its policy of open aggression in many parts of the
globe, the United States frequently poses as the ‘anti-colonial’
power in condemnation of British imperialism. “The pose is
thin, and the mask continually falls, even often over critical
anti-colonialist resolutions pressed by the Afro-Asian and
socialist majority in the United Nations, when the United
States and Britain find themselves alone, or only with France,
Portugal, South Africa and Australia voting against or abstain-
ing.”* In the last nine years American investments on this

* British Colonial Policy and Neo-Colonialist Rivalries, R. Palme Dutt,
International Affairs, Moscow, August 1964.

continent have trebled, growing at a faster rate than in any
other area. In 1961 alone American monopolies profited by
some £11-2 m. which they took out of Africa.

The rising tide of nationalism in the colonial territories was
remarked by the shrewder operators of United States finance
capital as America’s opportunity to insinuate itself into what
were the jealously guarded preserves of rival imperialisms.
Anti-imperialist stirrings had begun to show themselves in Asia
and Africa before the outbreak of the last world war. As
hostilities progressed, America came out more and more openly
for the ending of colonial rule. Press and other public propa-
ganda harked back to America’s own fight against colonialism.
The remembrance was linked in people’s minds with the bud-
ding nationalist movements that were bringing overt pressure
for independence around the globe. War-torn Europe would
provide part of the answer to America’s need to export invest-
ment capital and goods; but territories newly released from the
political power of rival imperialisms would offer practically
virgin fields.

A fabulous growth in American monopoly capitalism occurred
during the first forty years of the present century. United States
foreign investments vied with those of Europe, overtook and
surpassed them. In 1900, American private foreign investments
were small by comparison with Europe’s— $500 m. to Britain’s
$12,000 m. and France’s $600 m. By 1930 the growth rate of
America’s foreign investments had already overleaped those of
Britain, standing at $17,000 m. against the latter’s $19,000, and.
way ahead of France’s $7,000 m. America’s foreign investment
Position was supreme by 1949— $19,000 m. against Britain’s
$12,000 m., the level at which it had opened the century.
France’s level had sunk to $2,000 m. The first world war
eliminated Germany’s foreign investments and reduced those
of France; the second world war eliminated Germany, Italy and
Japan. The American Government, moreover, had added
$14,000 m. to its monopolists’ $19,000 m. of private foreign
investments. The Government loans ‘are political loans rather
than direct profit-making investments. But they enhance the
Position of United States finance-capital, by providing markets
for surplus goods and by increasing profits of private American
investors in the borrowing countries’.* The second world war
gave explosive momentum to American capitalism and helped
it to increase its overseas investments and exports of manu-
factured goods to the colonial preserves of European and
Japanese imperialism. In the decade 1938-48 America’s share
of the imports into these territories rose from 11 per cent to
25 per cent. Her African trade in the period went from $150 m.
to $1,200 m., at which figure it represented almost 15 per cent
of all Africa’s foreign trade.

American monopoly’s appetite was whetted by the income of
$18,000 m. by which it had profited from its foreign invest-
ments in the period 1920-48. The prospects in 1948 looked
even richer, and proved so. Between 1950 and 1959 private
American firms invested $4,500 m. in the developing countries
and made three times as much. Net profits came to $8,300 m.,
to which can be added millions of dollars in trading profits,
interest on loans, freight charges and other ancillary opera-
tions. All of this was helped along by Marshall Aid (the
Economic Co-operation Administration), born out of the
marriage between the American State and monopoly. The.
dollar was brandished as the universal cure-me-quick for
Europe, bringing fat super profits to its American owners. In
the confusion and devastation left by war, they were to slip
unobtrusively into the cosy corners from which the European
imperialists would be edged out both from Europe and its
territories overseas. American financial and industrial capital
used the opportunity which Europe’s post-war weakness offered
to draw upon its resources. It fed on war-ruined Europe,
though not to the same degree as Western imperialism exploited
the colonial and semi-colonial world. The powerful German
metallurgical and chemical trusts, Vereinigte Stahlwerke and
I. G. Farben, were broken down. The West German State
established in 1949 came under a military occupation that
controlled its foreign trade, its foreign policy and defence. Of
the factories which had escaped wartime destruction, some were
dismantled. Many of Germany’s best scientists and technicians

* See American Imperialism, Perlo, pp. 28-29.

were lured to America and Britain. The secrets and patents of
the large trusts were appropriated, the archives of the most
important bank, the Deutsche Bank, turned over to the occupy-
ing forces by Dr Hermann J. Abs, Hitler’s despoiler of Yugo-
slavia, who was saved from the death to which he was
condemned first by the British and then by the American
military authorities. Germany was being made safe for the
democracy of its imperialist conquerors. The Marshall Plan
was used to push American imperialist penetrations into the
fragmented German industries and financial institutions, into
which it bought heavily. Large sums were also handed out to
French and Belgian mining concerns in order to tighten the
links with American capitalism and support its domination.

An eye also had to be kept on the socialism that was
advancing in Europe and Asia. Before the opening of the 1950s
the cold war began to hot up. It was felt that the threat of heavy
German competition which had inspired the limitations put
upon it by the victorious imperialisms could be cushioned by
drawing Germany into Western strategy and by greater par-
ticipations from United States capital. Germany’s position
in the metallurgical and chemical fields began to change as
that country was drawn into the over-all pattern of Western
defence.

More energetic exploration for metal and mineral resources
was undertaken in Africa and elsewhere. Africa’s raw materials
are an important consideration in the military build-up of the
NATO countries, in which are included those of the European
Common Market. Their industries, especially the strategic and
nuclear factories, depend largely upon the primary materials
that come from the less developed countries. Post-war Europe
sustained a precarious shortage of basic supplies for its steel
manufactures. Belgium needed more rich ores, Sweden more
Coal and coke, which America supplied in return for fine ores.
Britain lacked pig iron and scrap, her coke was short and
inferior. Both France and Germany had fallen behind in coke

- Supplies. Production of Lorraine coal was declining because of
. lack of equipment, German coal because the Ruhr was pro-
: ducing less. Investment in industries ‘with a high value pro-

duction’, that is, the mineral transformation and heavy
industries, while providing the opportunity to influence the
European economies and hence their policies towards United
States’ ideological domination, did not give the same scope for
the quicker and larger profits that production of primary
products in the emergent countries offered.

The Point Four Programme supported the Marshall Planners
in opening up Africa to United States capital and its European
associates. Before the second world war only three per cent of
America’s foreign investments were in Africa and less than five
per cent of the continent’s trade was with the United States.
Firestone interests in Liberian rubber and small participations
in South African and Rhodesian mines accounted for most of
the $200 m. invested in Africa. As the war pushed into this
continent, military bases and trade connections were estab-
lished by the Americans, from which they pursued their greater
penetrations after the end of the war. E.C.A. (Marshall Plan)
funds financed American exploration groups, sent in the best
colonial tradition to prepare the way for mining companies and
military expeditions. It was announced by E.C.A. in July 1949
that ‘American experts with Marshall Plan aid are probing
Africa from the Atlas Mountains to the Cape of Good Hope for
agricultural and mineral wealth’, and later on that ‘opportuni-
ties for American capital participation were disclosed in French
North African lead mining, French Cameroon tin mining,
French Congo lead-zinc mining. .. .’ An E.C.A. loan to Mines
de Zellidja, a French concern under the aegis of the Penarroya
company, the fourth largest lead and zinc producer in the world,
enabled Newmont Mining Corporation (an American mining
and crude oil concern with 30 per cent of its interests in South
Africa and Canada) to buy into the company and manage its
operations.

Europe’s post-war instability was turned to United States’
account in the new division of Africa. In the fall of 1949, after
America had forced currency devaluation upon the European
countries, a committee of leading British and American bankers
was formed to push U.S. investments in Africa and other parts
of the still remaining British Empire. A similar committee with
similar purpose was established two months later between
American bankers and those of France. The hand of these
establishments is seen today all over Africa in the consortia that
are fast laying a grip on the continent’s riches. Rockefeller,
Morgan, Kuhn Loeb and Dillon Read institutions; the big
British banks, Barclays, Lloyds, Westminster, Provincial, the
investment houses pivoted around Hambros, Rothschild, Philip
Hill; the French banks, Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas,
Banque de |’Union Parisienne, Banque de |’Indochine, Union
Européen Industrielle, Banque Worms, Crédit Lyonnais,
Lazard Fréres, etc., and the leading German and Italian banks.

These and their associates are the financial institutions that
dominate the monetary and fiscal sectors of many of the newly
independent States. They support the new industrial revolution
of automation, electronics and nuclear and space development,
in which America plays the lead and which has swept U.S.
imperialism to its present ascendancy. American groups domi-
nant in the mining and ore processing and finishing industries
are involved directly or through their bankers and financing
houses in ventures with leading European producers and their
financial backers. The finance-capitalists who control the lead-
ing corporations in the extractive, metallurgical, chemical,
nuclear and space industries of the west are to be seen stretch-
ing out across the seven seas and taking command of the sources
of primary materials in Asia, Oceania, Australia, New Zealand,
Central and South America, and Africa. U.S. investments in
Canada in 1962 went up by nearly $700 m., mostly for develop-
ing iron ore properties. An additional $270 m. invested in other
developed countries went mainly to Australia and Japan. Latin
American investments of United States capital increased by
$250 m. in 1962. In the previous year the increase was over
$400 m. The U.S. Department of Commerce reported that
private American investments and assets overseas reached
$60,000 m. at the end of 1962 and advanced a further $3,000 m.
in the first six months of 1963. Private investors in the United
States added $4,300 m. in 1962 to their holdings of assets and
investments abroad.

Direct private American investment in Africa increased
between 1945 and 1958 from $110 m. to $789 m., most of it
drawn from profits. Of the increase of $679 m. actual new
money invested during the period was only $149 m., United
States profits from these investments, including reinvestment
of surpluses, being estimated at $704 m. As a result African
countries sustained losses of $555 m. If allowance is made for
grants for ‘non-military’ purposes, estimated then by U.S,
Congress at $136 m., Africa’s net total losses still reached
$419 m. Official American statistics put the gross profits made
by U.S. monopolies in Africa between 1946-59 at $1,234 m.,
though other estimates place them at $1,500 m. Whichever way
they are looked at, it requires no great mathematical mind to
make out from these figures the almost hundred per cent
profitability on investment in Africa.

The avid explorations that have gone on apace in the last two
or three decades for additional reserves of all the metals and
minerals that are important for modern industrial supremacy
have been instigated by the drive for monopoly, upon which
supremacy and its super-profits rest. A recent example makes
the principle clear. Alcan Industries, a British associate of Alcoa
(Aluminium Company of America) through Alcan (Aluminium
Ltd. of Canada), according to a Sunday Times headline (issue of
18 October 1964), wrapped up ‘the last of the foil’. That is,
Alcan Industries paid £54 m. to take over the last independent
firm (Fisher’s Foils) in British aluminium foil making, having
already swallowed most of the rest. This was done, it is said,
to bring about ‘rationalisation’. But in boardroom talk it has
another meaning, ‘sewing up the industry’.

Part of the objective of gaining control of industries and
new-found raw materials’ sources is to deprive rivals of their
use. The manipulation of artificial scarcity is another of
monopoly’s tactics for maintaining profits. For three years until
mid-1964 the big copper companies were running production
at between 80 and 85 per cent of capacity to keep up prices.
Steel production, too, was held back to something like 80 per
cent of capacity. Exploitation under imperialism does not, nor
will, always follow upon the finding of new sources of raw
materials. Whoever monopolises the major sources of supply
controls output by having the decisive voice in what deposits
shall or shall not be worked, and to what degree.

Monopoly allows the monopolists to manipulate the econo-
mies of other countries in their interests. In the case of bauxite,
for instance, Mellon-dominated Alcoa is sovereign and has
drawn into its orbit the other major producers, Kaiser and
Reynolds. Because of the tremendous cost of building power
plants, upon which the conversion of bauxite into alumina
depends, the exploitation of all known reserves of this ore by
private capital would defeat the prime incentive of monopoly—
profit—for the super-abundant production that would result
would depress prices. West Africa is exceptionally rich in
bauxite, but the individual countries are not equally favoured
with the power to develop resources. Ghana is providing
hydro-electric power which could be used to convert alumina
in both Ghana and Guinea. This would be a welcome co-
operative effort within the framework of a united continental
economy.

Another weapon that is held over the heads of the_primary
producing countries is the threat of using synthetic alternatives,
and the replacement of traditional metals by others. Synthetic
diamond plants have been established by De Beers, the world’s
monopolist in natural diamonds, by the Belgian company,
MIBA, which controls Congo’s natura] diamonds, the largest
supplier in Africa, by the General Electric Corporation in the

U.S. and by Japan. The price of copper was held down by the
main producers on the London metal market at a period of
Tecession in its marketing because of the likely use of aluminium
in its place for certain purposes, while plastics, on the other
hand, are frequently proposed as an alternative to aluminium.
Vast sums are expended in research for new materials and in
scientific invention of labour-saving machinery and equipment.
Thus metals that are being threatened with substitution are at
the same time being developed for a wider variety of finished
goods. Such research projects and the resultant re-equipment

. Of factories and industries which must be done if the original
ivestment is to be justified, calls for tremendous capital sums
which frequently can only be met from the assets of financial
and. insurance establishments. Consequently, banks and insnr-
ance companies dominate industrial finance and exercise a
leading role in the push for monopolist ascendancy. The banks
and insurance companies have been foremost in the process
that has brought monopoly to its present peak, and it is their
financial power that supports the increasing movement towards
greater and greater concentration of monopoly.

Today, competition in the thrust to secure and hold monopoly
over whole industries and sources of raw materials has intensi-
fied to the point where mergers are taking place at a dizzy rate.
The struggle is grimly tense and in the ding-dong battle for
domination a truce is arranged at critical points, by which
influence is divided with mutual consent. Harmony, however,
is more apparent than real. The struggle for re-division is
proceeding all the time, and the changes that take place within
the combining organisations are observed to be more and more
frequent.

Present-day monopoly is highly variegated and spread out.
While it draws its strength from its monopolistic position, it is
on the other hand seriously exposed to the dangers that face a
multiple organism that stretches its limbs to extremity in
different directions. A fracture at any one point can lead to a
disjunction which may unbalance the structure. And the
monopoly’s rivals are always on the alert to spot its most
exposed parts in order to deliver a blow that will enable the
most relentless competitor to insinuate into the broken organ.
Hence monopoly, having passed through the stages of cartelisa-
tion, combine, trust and syndicate, is today more and more
making use of a further protective safeguard. That is the
consortium, through which it aims at immobilising the rivals
and disarming the associates who are permitted to join this most
ravishing of imperialist contrivances. Usually in a consortium
there is a dominant party, either directly or through (and with)
affiliates and associates, which enables it to exert the largest
influence upon the affairs of the consortium. Furthermore, each
of the parties to the consortium will have its own string of
appendages or even a principal standing outside the consortium.
All continue the fight outside, while those within exercise their
efforts to enlarge the importance of their share of the group
activities. For example, as a monopoly it will be in control of a
complex of companies connected at many levels with the pro-
duction of primary materials, their processing from the original
state right through all the stages of transformation into a variety
of semi-finished and finished goods from the most ordinary
article to the most complicated and delicate equipment and
heavy plant and machinery. The monopoly does not restrict
itself to a single raw material, though it will be pre-eminent in
one or two. Nor does it restrict itself to any particular depart-
ment of manufacture or enterprise that may be ancillary to its
basic activities, though here again it may specialise in certain
lines. Many monopolies branch into real estate and land
development projects, as construction and contracting work
bring quick and high returns and high rents. This form of
capital investment is growing rapidly in the present era of
enlarging industrialisation and the growth of new towns, and
extends to large-scale agriculture.

In Africa the consortium is making the most sinister pene-
trations. It extends from the monopolistic amalgamations of
American and European finance-capital, particularly those
combined within the European Common Market, where
financial consortia have been set up as the most effective means
of profiting from the competitive struggle that is spiralling
within this so-called unifying organisation. The prime objective
is to monopolise Africa’s sources of raw materials, not, as it is
claimed, to assist the African countries to develop their econo-
mies. For the materials are carried off largely in their raw state
or as concentrates to enhance the productive output of the
imperialist countries and to be returned to them in the form of
heavy equipment for extractive industry and the infrastructure
for carrying the resources away.

It is out of the revenue from the trade in these materials that
the African countries look to amass part of the capital that will

Make it possible for them to utilise these same commodities in
the service of their own development. Paradoxically, however,
these precious counters in Africa’s future are meantime being
Used to widen the economic gap between her and the highly
industrialised countries, which are hurriedly exploiting the
opportunity to make good deficiencies in their economies. Since
those who are carrying on the exploitation are also the monopo-
lists who manipulate the markets for primary products at the
one end and the price for the final products at the other, the
countries of origin must be pinned down to a long wait before
they can tackle on a major scale the capital problem facing all
the developing countries of seriously raising the standard of
life of their people, if they make no effort to gird their resources
in a more practical and self-supporting manner. This is the
answer to those pious economists who assure us that what
matters is not what is taken out of our lands but what is left
behind.

The reply has been given by the Commission for Aid to
Development of O.E.C.D. in its estimate that if the industrial
countries continue to increase their gross national product by
three per cent per annum, it will take the less developed
countries two hundred years at least to catch up with their
standard of living, assuming that the unindustrialised nations
reach an annual increase of five per cent. Yet how problematical
the achievement of this five per cent remains in the light of the
drain on resources from the less developed countries to the
highly developed ones. In most African countries the rate of
rise in the domestic product has barely kept pace with the rate
of population growth of two and a half to three per cent. It is
the less developed countries that continue to carry the burden
of the increasing development of the highly developed. Fire-
stone, for example, has taken $160 m. worth of rubber out of
Liberia in the past quarter century. In return the Liberian
Government has received a paltry $8 m. The average net profit
made by this American company is three times the entire
Liberian revenue.

From south to north, financial and industrial consortia have
spread across Africa, busily staking out claims to mineral, metal
and fuel resources, to forest and land produce, and erecting
extractive and primary conversion industries in which they are
entrenched as stanchions. In Algeria, for example, the really big
investment stampede coincided with the war of national libera-
tion. Between 1951 and 1955 there was an inrush of French and
French-American investment greater than ever before. Win or
lose, the financial and industrial interests were entrenching
themselves within the Algerian economy. Throughout Africa
the industrial giants are supported by financial institutions
which dominate the monetary and fiscal sectors of so many of
the independent States. Most heavily engaged are the mammoth
panking and insurance institutions and the multi-millionaire
companies they control, bolstered by the international institu-
tions like the World Bank and its affiliates. These formidable
alliances radiate from the United States, Britain, Germany,
France, Holland, Italy, Sweden. They move around the metal-
lurgical and chemical combines with the E.C.S.C. (European
Coal and Steel Community), such as Sollac, G.I.S. (Groupe-
ment de |’ Industrie Sidérurgique), Sidelor (Union Sidérurgique
Lorraine), Usinor (Union Sidérurgique du Nord de la France),
Krupp, Thyssen, Kuhlmann, Pierrelatte, Farbwerke Hoechst,
Bayer, BASF (Badische Anilin & Soda Fabrik), I.C.I. They are
in the assemblages of bankers such as Consafrique (Consortium
Européen pour le Développement des Ressources Naturelles de
l’Afrique), situated at the same address as the International
Bank in Luxembourg; Eurofin, Compagnie Bancaire, Finsider,
Cofimer, Union Européenne Industrielle et Financiére, and
_ others.

Powerful American corporations like Bethlehem Steel, United.
States Steel, Republic Steel, Armco Steel, Newmont Mining,
Johns Manville, Union Carbide, Olin Mathieson, Alcoa, Kaiser,
crop up among all the post-war primary materials producing
Projects on this continent. Their alliances are spread among the
leading metallurgical and. financial companies of Europe in
combinations that mask the underlying competition. This com-
petitiveness erupts to the surface when circumstances cause a
breakdown in the facade of peaceful co-existence between rival
imperialists operating in the sovereign States of others, to which
they make assumptions of power and use as pawns in the
Struggle for monopolistic supremacy. Gabon is vocal testimony
to these assertions. Mass discontent with the existing regime

_ which led to the disorders of February 1964 was the occasion
utilised by France to warn the United States that she would '
brook no encroachment on the claims she lays to the manganese,
uranium and oil riches of this, her former colony. Neglected
under the colonial regime, these resources have assumed
inestimable value to France in the struggle against the advance
of American imperialism in Europe in the new epoch of atomic
rivalry. France sent in paratroopers to force the issue of whose
pawn Gabon would remain. United States Steel may have the
dominant participation in Comilog (Cie de l’Ogooue), which is
working on the bed of the vastly rich Franceville manganese
deposits, but France, through the Cie des Mines d’Uranium de
Franceville, controls the uranium field at Mounana, and is
urgently occupied in the attempt to foil the aspirations of the
American oil barons to undisputed access to Gabon’s offshore
petroleum reaches.

5. The truth behind the headlines

REALLY to understand what goes on in the world today, it is
necessary to understand the economic influences and pressures
that stand behind the political events. The financial columns
of the world’s press give, in fact, ‘the news behind the news’.
Every few days we come upon such newspaper announcements
as: ‘Morgan Grenfell participates in new French bank’; or
‘African Banking Group’; or ‘Consortium gains voting power
in Hulett’ (South African sugar monopoly); or ‘New factoring
company set up in Germany’.

These are newspaper headlines actually taken at random.
However, when examined even briefly, the facts reveal an
attenuated line of connection between powerful financial
groups that exert the most decisive pressure upon the happen-
ings of our time. The facts relate to the men and interests
directly involved or indirectly connected with the rearrange-
ments the articles cover. Not that the full facts are ever
revealed. On the contrary, they are more often concealed, and
It takes knowledge of the careers of the personalities and
groups which the articles link to see behind them the inevitable
direction of the reported arrangements and their intrinsic
Meaning in terms of economic and political power.

_ Let us take the item of the Morgan Grenfell participation
in the new French bank (Financial Times, London, 18 Decem-
ber 1962). Morgan Grenfell & Co. acts effectively as the
London end of the important American banking house of
J. P. Morgan & Co. which, in 1956, already owned one-third
of the British company. It should not, therefore, surprise us
to learn that the new ‘continental’ bank in which Morgan
Grenfell is participating is called Morgan et Cie; more especi-
ally, since 70 per cent of the capital of 10 million new francs
is held by the Morgan Guaranty International Finance
Corporation, and 15 per cent by Morgan Grenfell. What about
the remaining 15 per cent? This is divided between two Dutch
banks— Hope & Co. of Amsterdam and R. Mees & Zoonen of
Rotterdam—with both of which the Morgan group has had
close association over many years. This association has been
drawn even closer by the acquisition in March 1963 of a
14 per cent in both of them by the Morgan Guaranty Inter-
national Banking Corporation, a subsidiary of Morgan
Guaranty Trust.

How was this done? Through the purchase of stock in
Bankier-compagnie, a company that consolidated the activities
of the two Dutch banks, which, nevertheless, continue to do
business under their own names. This form of one in two is
the accepted formula by which the great combinations attempt
to delude the world about their compact formations.

Chairman of Morgan et Cie is Mr Pierre Meynial, vice-
president of Morgan Guaranty Trust in Paris, whose brother,
Mr Raymond Meynial, is a director of the Banque Worms.
Vice-president of Morgan et Cie is the Rt. Hon. Viscount
Harcourt, K.C.M.G., O.B.E., a managing director of Morgan
Grenfell and chairman of four important British insurance
companies—British Commonwealth, Gresham Fire & Acci-
dent, Gresham Life Assurance, and Legal & General.

‘French African banking move’ captions an item of rather
less than eight lines in the Financial Times of 26 July 1963,
which informs us shortly that ‘the network of the Banque
Commerciale Africaine in Senegal, Ivory Coast, Cameroun
and Congo Republic has been taken over by Société Générale,
France’s second largest bank’. It is in the single comment the
newspaper allows itself that we find the grist: “The arrangement
will result in a substantial increase in the volume of deposits
held by Société Générale’.

Société Générale was founded under Napoleon the Third in
1864. One of its chief participants was Adolphe Schneider, a
member of the Schneider iron and steel empire, who was at
the same period also one of the regents of Banque de France.
Both Banque de France and Société Générale have now been
nationalised. This means in effect that the French Government
has a direct interest in the network of the Banque Commerciale
Africaine that Société Générale has taken over.

Nationalisation does not stand in the way of the closest
association with the world’s most powerful private banking
institutions, as the facts given under the title ‘African banking
group’ (West Africa, 22 September 1963) illustrate. The title,
however, is misleading. There is little that is ‘African’ about
the group, the body mainly concerned being the Bankers
International Corporation, a subsidiary of Bankers Trust
Company, which shares with Morgan Guaranty Trust the
commercial business of J. P. Morgan & Co. The others are
Société Générale and other unnamed European financial
institutions.

This combination of Western banks, topped by the long-
armed Morgan interests, is to extend the formation of banks
in just those territories where Société Générale has acquired
the interests of Banque Commerciale Africaine, namely, Ivory
Coast, Senegal, Cameroun and Congo (Brazzaville). The
American Federal Reserve Board has given its approval to the
Morgan extension, as have the governments of the African
countries concerned. Comment is unnecessary, since we can
readily accept the view of the senior vice-president and head
of the international banking department of the Bankers Trust,
Mr G. T. Davies, who happily announced that participation
in these four nations will substantially increase the scope of
Bankers Trust company’s activities in Africa, a continent in
which we are vitally interested. The news item concludes with
the information that Bankers International Corporation has
equity interests in the Liberian Trading & Development Bank
(Tradevco), and in the United Bank of Africa, Nigeria.

The fact that another sugar consortium (Financial Times,
8 November 1962) has managed to obtain over 50 per cent of
the ordinary shares and thereby the majority voting power in
the South African sugar monopoly of Sir J. Hulett & Sons
appears, on the surface, to be entirely unrelated to the other
newspaper items we have already scrutinised. But let us go on
with our examination.

Behind the combination of sugar companies that has gained
ascendancy in the Hulett monopoly are visible the hands of
two important South African share issuing and underwriting
houses, Philip Hill Higginson & Co. (Africa), and Union
Acceptances Ltd.

Harold Charles Drayton is the dominating personality in
the Philip Hill chain of financial and investment companies,
based in London. Harry F. Oppenheimer of South Africa is
chairman of Union Acceptances. Among Mr Drayton’s com-
pany appointments are those of chairman of European &
General Corporation, Second Consolidated Trust, and director
of Midland Bank and Midland Bank Executor & Trustee Co.,
Eagle Star Insurance Co., Standard Bank, Consolidated Gold
Fields of South Africa and Ashanti Goldfields Corporation.

Mr Oppenheimer, among his more than seventy company
appointments, includes those of chairman of African Explosives
& Chemical Industries, Anglo American Corporation of South
Africa, De Beers Consolidated Mines, and First Union Invest-
ment Trust. He is a director of African & European Investment
Co., Barclays Bank D.C.O., British South African Co. and
Central Mining & Investment Corporation.

Deputy chairman of Anglo American Corporation is Sir
K. Acutt, who is also a director of British South Africa Co.
and Standard Bank. Co-director with the deputy chairman of
Anglo American Corporation on British South Africa Co. 1s
Mr Robert Annan, who sits beside Mr Drayton on the board
of Consolidated Goldfields. Mr Annan also has the distinction
of being an extraordinary director of Scottish Amicable Life
Assurance Society.

A colleague of Mr Drayton’s on both the Midland Bank and
the bank’s Executor & Trust Co. is the Rt. Hon. Lord
Baillieu, K.B.E., C.M.G., who happens to be at the same time
deputy chairman of the Central Mining & Investment Cor-
oration, on which Harry F. Oppenheimer is to be found.

Lord Baillieu sits also on English Scottish & Australian Bank.

Another director of Standard Bank is Mr William Antony
Acton, whose close ties with the banking world are seen in his
deputy chairmanship of the National Bank and directorships
on the Bank of London & Montreal, Standard Bank Finance
& Development Corporation, Bank of London & South
America and Bank of West Africa. It is certainly not sheer
coincidence that Lord Luke of Pavenham has a seat with
H. C. Drayton on the board of Ashanti Goldfields and occupies
a directorship on the Bank of London & South America, on
which Mr Acton is seated. Nor can it be by mere chance that
Mr Esmond Charles Baring, former director and London agent
of Anglo American Corporation and associated with a number
of other companies in the Oppenheimer group, is a member of
the family that operates the merchant house of Baring Bros.
and maintains the closest links with the investment world.

Other important personages who graced the board of British
South Africa Co. in 1963 were the late Sir Charles J. Hambro,
P. V. Emrys-Evans, and Viscount Malvern, P.C., C.H.,
K.C.M.H. Sir Charles Hambro was the senior director of the
Bank of England. He chaired the biggest of the City of
London’s merchant banks, the £176 million Hambros Bank,
and presided over Union Corporation, the South African
mining finance group which embraces numerous of the Anglo
American interests associated with the Harry F. Oppenheimer
concerns.

The Standard Bank of South Africa crops up once more
among the directorships of Lord Malvern, which includes
Scottish Rhodesia Finance and Merchant Bank of Central
 Africa. The last-named. bank is a creation of the Rothschild
banking group, in which one finds Banque Lambert, one of
the important Belgian bankes, some 17.5 per cent of whose
interests are concentrated in Africa, notably in the Congo. The
bank also has an interest in another Rothschild creation, the
Five Arrows Securities Co., an investment house operating in
Canada, and under Rockefeller influence. Mr Paul V. Emrys-
Evans, British South Africa Co.’s vice-president, is now
president of Oppenheimer’s expansive Anglo American Cor-
poration, and also upon that of Barclays Bank D.C.O. A seat
on Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation brings Mr Emrys-Evans into
the company of Lord Baillieu, its deputy chairman, and his
associations with H. C. Drayton.

Several of the leading British banks and insurance com-
panies and some of their European associates participate in the
Standard Bank. Its chairman, Sir Frank Cyril Hawker, used to
represent the Bank of England, and its vice-chairman, Sir
F. W. Leith-Ross, represents the National Provincial Bank.
W. A. Acton’s banking associations have already been outlined
above. H. C. Drayton brings in the interests of his own
financial groups, as well as those of the Midland Bank and
Eagle Star Insurance. Sir E. L. Hall Patch, a director of the
Standard Bank of South Africa who resigned at the July 1963
annual general meeting, is a director of Commercial Union
Assurance Co. Sir G. S. Harvie-Watt is an associate of
H. C. Drayton on Eagle Star Insurance and the Midland Bank.
He is chairman of Consolidated Gold Fields and a director of
American Zinc Lead & Smelting Co. of the U.S.A.

John Francis Prideaux brings the interests of the Common-
wealth Development Corporation into the bank, as well as
those of Westminster Bank, the Bank of New South Wales
and sundry other financial and investment concerns. William
Michael Robson as vice-chairman of the Joint East & Central
African Board of the Standard Bank, brings to bear all those
vested interests joined in the Board, while he represents
separately the investments of the finance holding, merchant,
shipping and plantation companies of the Booker Bros.
McConnell group, which has a monopoly grip upon the
economy of British Guiana. Charles Hyde Villiers holds a
brief for Banque Belge Ltd. and Sun Life Assurance Society.
Banque Belge Ltd. is the London outlet of Banque de la
Société Générale de Belgique and controls in its turn, among
others, Banque du Congo Belge, Belgian-American Banking
Corporation, Belgian-American Bank & Trust Co., Continental
American Fund (Ameri-fund) of Baltimore, U.S.A., and
Canadafund Co., Montreal, Canada.

The headline, ‘New factoring company set up in Germany’
( Financial Times, 4 October 1963), has a superficially innocuous
look. However, the briefest glance at the text takes us at once
right into the world of international banking. For we meet
extensions of British and American capital that have stimulated
and supported an international factoring venture which has
expanded in a very short time across four continents. The focal
oint is a Swiss holding company, International Factors AG.
of Chur. Its nominal capital is Sw. Frs. 6,000,000 (about
£490,000). It has now established activity in Germany, where
a company, International Factors Deutschland, has been set
up in conjunction with three German banks, the Chur com-
pany retaining 50 per cent of the capital. Of the rest, 20 per
cent is held by the Frankfurter Bank, 25 per cent by Mittel-
rheinische Kreditbank Dr Horback & Co., and five per cent
by a private bank in Frankfurt, George Hauck. Frankfurter
Bank’s portion, however, will be enlarged by the fact that it
has acquired a 51 per cent stake in Horback & Co., by way of a
share exchange.

The heavy banking interests behind the international factor-
ing venture, which has affiliates in Switzerland, Australia,
South Africa, Israel, and now Germany, are the First National
Bank of Boston, and M. Samuel & Co. of London. A holding
company under Samuel influence, Tozer Kemsley & Milbourn
(Holdings), is a third. The First National Bank of Boston,
once firmly inside the great Morgan financial empire, has,
since 1955, come increasingly under Rockefeller influence,
though it still has significant ties with Morgan. It is joined
with Chase National Bank (Rockefeller) in the American
Overseas Finance Corporation.

Chairman of M. Samuel & Co. is Viscount Bearsted, a
director of the Rothschild creation, Alliance Assurance Co.

and its affiliate, Sun Alliance Insurance. Chairman of both these
insurance companies is Mr T. D. Barclay, a director of Barclays
Bank, Barclays Bank (France) and British Linen Bank, a
Barclays Bank affiliate.

At the beginning of February 1963, the First National City
Bank of New York, through International Banking Corpora-
tion, institutions controlled by the Rockefeller interests, bought
a 16% per cent share in M. Samuel & Co., represented by
600,000 ordinary shares, at a cost of £1,900,000. First National
City placed the chairman of its executive committee, R. S,
Perkins, upon the Samuel board. The shot in the arm injected
by the Rockefeller capital has enabled the Samuel banking firm
to spread itself into the European Market, where it has joined
the European bankers association brought together by the
important French bank, Banque de Paris et des Pays-Bas,
This is Groupement d’Etudes pour l’Analyse des Valeurs
Européennes, whose purpose is to canalise what is called
‘institutional investment’.

The house of M. Samuel has also been placed in charge of
managing another Common Market organisation, domiciled in
London, New European & General Investment Trust, in which
it is associated with Banque Lambert, Banque de Paris et des
Pays-Bas, the prominent German banking house of Sal
Oppenheim & Cie., the Dutch bankers, Lippmann, Rosenthal
& Co., the Credito Italiano of Italy, Banco Urquijo of Spain
and Union de Banques Suisses of Switzerland.

We may appear to have gone at some length into the
intricacies of the financial and economic interests behind some
innocent-looking headlines. Yet these are in fact the merest
directional indications of today’s trend of ever-tightening links
between a short list of incredibly powerful groups that domin-
ate our lives on a global scale. The task of taking their detailed
significance farther is the main purpose of this book.

Nevertheless, even this brief breakdown provides illumin-
ating evidence of the serpentine interlocking of financial
monopoly today. What we observe, above all, is the constant
penetration of a few banking and financial institutions into
large industrial and commercial undertakings, creating a chain
of links that bring them into a conncctive relationship making
for domination in both national and international economy.
The influence exercised by this domination is carried into
politics and international affairs, so that the interests of the
overriding monopoly groups govern national policies. Their
representatives are placed in key positions in government,
army, navy and air force, in the diplomatic service, in policy-
making bodies and in international organisations and institu-
tions through which the chosen policies are filtered on to the
world scene.

This process had already reached a high enough pitch before
the outbreak of the first world war to call forth a number of
important studies of its growth and potentialities. Two of these
studies, Imperialism, by the English Liberal, J. A. Hobson,
published in 1902, and Finance Capital, by the Austrian
Marxist, Rudolf Hilferding, published in 1910, were used by
Lenin as the main basis of his study of Imperialism, which he
described as ‘the highest stage of capitalism’.
It came at the stage at which competition transformed into
monopoly, the so-called combination of production, that is to
say, the grouping in a single enterprise of different branches of
industry, and monopoly itself became dominated by banking
and finance capital. Lenin’s study was written in 1916. Since
then the domination of financial monopoly has speeded up
tremendously.

How is it possible that capitalism, rooted in free enterprise
and competition, has arrived at a stage where competition is
being eroded to the point where pyramidal monopolies exercise
dictatorial rights? The possibility lay in the very fact of free
enterprise itself. The spur of competition led to invention on
several planes. New machinery was devised to increase output
and profit, factories grew larger. Small units became unprofit-
able and were either driven out or swallowed up by bigger ones.
- Rail communication improved distribution and better ocean
. transport stimulated overseas trade and the bringing in of
- foreign raw materials.

The joint stock company that encouraged the growth of rail
and ocean transport served as a forcing instrument for banking
and insurance growth. New company laws assisted its exten-
Sion to industrial and commercial enterprises in which the
individual investor’s risk was lessened by the limitation upon
his liability.

_ Competition moved on to another level. Companies that
. Possessed large capital or were able to call upon it on their own
security were able to wield an unequal influence against weaker
ones. Profits became hinged to the elimination of competition,
The enormous expansion of industry at the end of last century
and the beginning of the present, was accompanied by a rapid
concentration into ever larger enterprises.

Combination of production was established as a cardinal
feature of capitalism. Firms that had begun by concentrating
upon one function of an industry spread into a group enterprise
that represented the consecutive stages of raw materials pro-
cessing, or were ancillary to one another. Trading houses
extended their activities into distribution and then into actual
production of finished goods from primary materials produced
from plantations and mines they acquired in overseas territories.

Hilferding, in his classic work on the subject, Finance
Capital, explains the reasons behind this process:

‘Combination levels out the fluctuations of trade and
therefore assures to the combined enterprises a more stable
rate of profit. Secondly, combination has the effect of
eliminating trade. Thirdly, it has the effect of rendering
possible technical improvements, and consequently, the
acquisition of super-profits over and above those obtained
by the “pure” (i.e. non-combined) enterprises. Fourthly, it
strengthens the position of the combined enterprises com-
pared with that of the “pure” enterprises, strengthens them
in the competitive struggle in periods of serious depression,
when the fall in prices of raw materials does not keep pace
with the fall in prices of manufactured goods.’

As monopoly of industry and commerce extended, the
reliance upon banking capital also increased. New methods of
production, the division of factories and businesses into de-
partments, research into the possibilities of new materials and
fresh ways of employing both old and new ones—all these,
while they eventually reinforced monopoly and enlarged profits,
called for capital sums that only the banks and their associates
in the insurance world were able to provide. Thus side by side
with the process of amalgamation of industrial enterprises went
the concentration of banks and their penetration into the large
industrial and commercial enterprises to whose capital they
heavily contributed.

From middlemen, originally performing the role of simple
moneylenders, the banks grew into powerful monopolies,
having at their command almost the whole means of produc-
tion and of the sources of raw materials of the given country
and in a number of countries. This transformation of numerous
humble middlemen into a handful of monopolists represents
one of the fundamental processes in the growth of capitalism
into capitalist imperialism.*

Union was established between the industrialist and the
banker, in which the latter dominated. In the U.S.A., for
instance, the United States Steel Corporation, which was an
amalgamation of several giant steel firms controlling half the
steel production of the country, was controlled by J. P.
Morgan’s banking interests because of the large investments
they had in the industry. Before the end of the first decade of
the present century, the inter-volutions of industry and bank-
ing had already taken place to a high degree. In Germany, for
instance, six of the biggest banks were represented by their
directors in a total of some 750 companies engaged in the most
diverse branches of industry: insurance, transport, heavy
industry, shipping, restaurants, theatres, art, publishing, etc.
Conversely, there sat on the boards of these six banks in 1910,
fifty-one of the biggest industrialists, including Krupp, iron
and steel magnate, armaments manufacturer and director of
the powerful Hamburg-American shipping line.

Today this process has gone very much deeper, and is
spreading its roots more embracingly every day. The six
German banks included the four giants, the Deutsche Bank,
Dresdner Bank, Disconto Gesellschaft, Commerzbank, all of
which have grown even more powerful. Allied with them today,
as in 1910, are the big German industrial trusts and cartels.
Krupp, A. E. G. Bayer, Badische Anilin & Soda Fabrik,
Farbwerke Hoechst (the last three the components into which
the great I. G. Farben was broken by the allies at the end of
the second world war), the explosives and armaments manu-

* Imperialism, Lenin, p. 45.

facturers connected with the massive I.C.I. and its continental]
affiliate, Solvay. For example, the Deutsche Bank is now
Germany’s leading bank and is placed as eleventh among the
foremost in the world. In 1870 the Deutsche Bank had a
capital of 15 million marks which it had been able to increase
to 200 million by 1908. In 1962 it disposed of funds amounting
to 1,100 billions of old French francs.

The rule of the financial oligarchy is maintained through
the principal device of the ‘holding company’, often estab-
lished with a purely nominal capital but controlling direct and
indirect subsidiaries and affiliates utilising vastly superior
finances. Assuming that a 50 per cent holding of the capital is
sufficient to control a company (sometimes it can be and is
considerably less), it is possible with an investment of, say,
£100,000 to control tens of millions in subsidiary and inter-
locked enterprises.

Concentrated in the hands of a few, finance capital exercises
a virtual monopoly, by reason of which it exacts enormous and
ever-increasing profits from company flotations, share under-
writings, debenture holdings, state loans, and bond issues.
The Deutsche Bank, for instance, adopts a specific procedure
for gaining control of enterprises and drawing in fresh profits.
When participating in the launching of new ventures or
extensions of already existing ones, it finds the whole of the
required capital from its own and associated resources. When
the formation is complete, the shares are unloaded at a
premium, the bank holding just sufficient to give it a com-
manding voice in the direction of affairs. At the same time, it
takes a profit on the original capital.

Flotation of foreign loans provides one of the highest
yielding fields of monopolist profits. Usually a borrowing
country is lucky if it gets more than nine-tenths of the loan
sum. Frequently it is less, particularly if it is a developing
country. Liberia’s loans are a revealing and classic example of
how monopoly finance operates in conjunction with govern-
ments to increase its profits.

In Liberia, in 1904, President Arthur Barclay reported that
the English seven per cent loan of 1871, originally £100,000,
of which only £27,000 actually reached the Liberian Treasury

F pecause of certain official defalcations, was the largest item of

 ¢he country’s indebtedness and would require three years’

~ gevenue to cover it. A desperate Liberian Government suc-
ceeded in arranging an international loan of $1,700,000. This
was subscribed by British, French, Dutch and German
panking houses associated with the United States financial
institutions of J. P. Morgan, the National City Bank, First
National Bank of New York and Kuhn Loeb & Co.

In this instance, the most arbitrary means were used in
applying and securing repayment of the loan. An American
Receiver General was appointed by the United States and sub-

receivers by Britain, France and Germany, an arrangement
which continued until America took over full control of
Liberia’s finances during the first world war. Little actual
cash went to the Liberian Government, but fancy profits went
to the banks and loan issue houses. Bonds to the value of

- $715,000 were delivered in London, $225,000 in Germany,
$460,000 in Amsterdam and $158,000 in New York to

~ ereditors of Liberia in payment of their outstanding claims.
It required reparations money from the sale of German
properties in Liberia to liquidate subsequent debts incurred
with the then British Bank of West Africa to try and meet the
claims on this loan.

It was only after a new loan was negotiated with the Fire-
stone Corporation of America in 1926 that the Liberian
Government was able to use $1,180,669 to pay off the principal
and accumulated interest on the 1912 loan. The loan offered
by Firestone was in the region of $5 million, at an interest rate

_ of seven per cent, but by 1945 still only half of this amount
had been subscribed. Firestone stipulations included the

- abolition of the office of Receiver of Customs and its replace-

. Ment by a Financial Adviser. It was under pressure of these

. debts that Liberia was obliged to cede large concessions for
tubber planting to Firestone, and later to the Goodrich
Rubber Company.

One of the principal functions of finance capital is the issue

of securities on which the discount rates are ridiculously high.

It is also an important method of consolidating financial
oligarchy. In boom periods the profits are immense. During
periods of depression, the banks acquire holdings by buying
up small or failing businesses, or engage in their reorganisation
at a profit. Money is made by the banks and the sphere of
control is extended. Financial assistance to land speculators is
extended. Financial assistance to land speculators is also a
means of entrenching control and inflating profits in times of
industrial expansion. Ground rent monopoly merges with
communications monopoly, since an important factor govern-
ing rise in land prices is good means of communication with
town centres.

In his book Monopoly: A Study of British Monopoly
Capitalism published in 1955 by Lawrence and Wishart, Sam
Aaronovitch has shown how the financial resources of Britain
have become concentrated in the hands of a small number of
big banks and financial institutions. Between them, the ‘Big
Five’ banks exercise immense power. In 1951 their 147
directors held 1,008 directorships of which 299, just under a
third, were in other financial institutions. Of these 299, 85
were in other banks and discount companies; 117 were in
insurance companies and 97 in investment trusts and finance
companies.’ (p. 49.)

“Talk about centralisation!’ wrote Karl Marx in Capital
(Vol. 3, Ch. 33):

‘The credit system, which has its centre in the so-called
national banks and the great moneylenders and usurers
about them is an enormous centralisation, and gives to this
class of parasites a fabulous power . . . to interfere with
actual production in a most dangerous manner—and this
gang knows nothing about production and has nothing to
do with it.’

Hegemony of the money institutions over industry is
assured by the vast reserves built up out of the various ways
by which capital is advanced to industry at high profit and
drawn from it through holding companies and interlocking
directorates. This process emphasises the separation of finance
capital from industrial capital. When this separation has
attained major proportions and the domination of finance
capital has become supreme, the stage of imperialism has been
reached This stage can be said to have been brought to
maturity at the turn of the century

From free competition, the fundamental characteristic of its
early stages, capitalism at its highest stage, has polarised into
monopoly, expressed in syndicates, trusts and cartels, with
which the capital of a small number of banks has merged. The
trusts and cartels have assumed an international character and
divided up the world among themselves. Monopoly extends
to the control of raw materials and markets, for the possession
of which, highly developed capitalism engages in an even more
intense struggle

At its imperialist stage, finance capital’s primary need is to
find. spheres of overseas investment which will return profits
at a greater rate than can be obtained at home. The export of
capital, therefore, becomes the dynamo of imperialism which
turns the export of commodities and leads to the capture of
colonies as the means of assuring monopolist control. Upon
this economic process is built the political ideology, the non-
economic superstructure, that infuses the battle for colonial
conquest. Hilferding expressed this ideology in a single concise
sentence: ‘Finance capital does not want liberty, it wants
domination’. Possession of colonies gives a guarantee to the
financial oligarchy of the owning country of the monopoly of
actual and potential sources of raw materials and outlets for
manufactured goods.

6. Primary resources and
foreign interests

AMERICAN and European companies connected with the world’s
most powerful banking and financial institutions are, with the
consent of African governments, entering upon major projects
designed to exploit new sources of primary products. In some
cases these are allied to long-term ventures for the establish-
ment of certain essential industries. In the main, however, they
are confining themselves to the production of materials in their
basic or secondary stages, with the object of transforming them
in the mills and plants owned and run by the exploiting
companies in the metropolitan lands.

Africa has failed to make much headway on the road to
purposeful industrial development because her natural resources
have not been employed for that end but have been used for the
greater development of the Western world. This has been a
continuing process that has gained tremendous momentum in
recent years, following the invention and introduction of new
processes and techniques that have quickened the output of
both the ferrous and non-ferrous metal industries of Europe
and America in order to keep pace with the ever-increas-
ing demand for finished goods. Military preparations and
nuclear expansion have had a considerable impact upon
this demand. World output of crude steel almost doubled
itself in the decade between 1950 and 1960, from 190 million
tons to 340 million tons. Even the regression of 1958 which
lasted through the following years failed to halt the progress,
which went on in lesser degree in both Eastern and Western
countries.

The general forecast is that this tempo of production will be
maintained. As it comes from Western sources, it makes little
allowance for expansion of African use of primary products,
and envisages a continuance of the present flow as between
developing source countries and highly industrialised users.
Nor does it take into account the likelihood of a repressive
tendency in Western economies that can certainly affect the
demand for raw materials. A publication of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe in 1959 estimated that the
world production of steel between 1972 and 1975 will be in
the region of 630 million tons. Before the last war most
of the Western world’s iron and steel output was based
upon local raw materials. The post-war years, particularly
since 1956, have seen an opposite trend. Something like a
quarter of the raw materials (90 million tons out of 400
million) used in the world’s metallurgical industries have
been imported.

The countries mainly importing these raw materials are the
United States, Western Europe and Japan. The Soviet Union
and the developing countries have at their disposal sufficient
quantities of domestic raw materials. At the present time three
large areas of primary resources are being exploited for the
benefit of the great producer countries. These are Africa,
Canada and South America; in particular Chile and Peru and
lately Venezuela. Canada has become a province of American
capital investment, which draws off high profits and exploits
_ Vast resources of raw products for conversion in American
. plants. South America and Africa, besides offering these
_ advantages, provide cheap labour and local governmental
assistance by way of duty exemption for imported machinery
_ and equipment as well as tax remission.

Surveys now being carried out in Africa are discovering more
and more deposits of valuable raw materials. Western investi-
gators regard them essentially as sources of exploitation for the
commerce and industry of their world, ignoring completely the
development of the countries in which they lie. Robert Saunal,
in an article in Europe (France) Outremer of November 1961
surveys the possibilities of Africa as a provider of ferrous
raw materials for the industries of the great metallurgica,
countries. He reminds his readers that there are sources
of these primary materials in Europe, such as Sweden and
Spain, and that for Japan there are the countries of Asia and
Oceania.

He concludes that European participation is a favourable
factor in starting off the exploitation of Africa’s mineral
resources, but that the new productive capacities in course of
development should counsel prudence and a detailed examina-
tion of the selling possibilities. These mines are bound to start
off in a situation of lively competition, which must have its
effect upon price levels. They need, therefore, to be subjected
to close preliminary examination before being embarked upon
and must depend upon agreement between the exploiting
companies and the host States which will give the former a just
return and the latter a stable fiscal regime for the functioning
of the ‘harmonised exploitation’. In short, the governments of
the new States are seen in the role of policemen for the banking
and industrial consortia bent upon continuing the old imperialist
pattern in Western-African relationships. The ‘stable fiscal
regime’ they will guarantee out of such exploitation will,
according to Robert Saunal, be based on conditions of depressed
prices arising from acute competition.

There has been a considerable increase in the production
of primary materials in Africa since 1945, under the
stimulus of post-war rebuilding needs throughout the world,
and the exigencies of cold-war stock-piling and armaments
requirements. Another driving factor has been the revolution
in productive methods and management. The surge of
colonial peoples towards independence must also be acknow-
ledged as a force contributing to the extension of raw materials
production.

In some cases the production of primary materials since 1945
has multiplied several times, and in most cases has doubled.
The scene in Guinea shows much change, following the dis-
covery of deposits of iron and bauxite. Diamond mining has
also made noticeable progress. The Ivory Coast in 1960 was
producing diamonds at an annual level of about 200,000 carats,
and operations have started in the manganese fields in the
neighbourhood of Grand Lahou. Calcium phosphate is being
exploited in Senegal, and aluminium and oxidised sand provide
some mining activity. The mining of iron ore is under way in
Mauritania, where an Anglo-French consortium is planning to
produce four million tons as a first stage, to be increased later
to six million tons annually. Deposits are estimated at around
115 million tons of 63 per cent iron grade. Finds of very rich
phosphate deposits in Senegal have brought a French-Belgian
financial and mining combination into the country to carry out
their exploitation. An estimated 40 million tons of raw phos-
phates are expected to allow a production of 13 million tons of
rich phosphates through the extraction of 600,000 tons of
concentrates annually for twenty years.

Phosphates have also been found in Togo, which are to be
exploited by a consortium associated with the Banque de Paris
et des Pays-Bas and established mining companies having
connections with the Société Générale de Belgique. Manganese,
uranium, oil and iron ore finds in Gabon have brought in
similar consortia for their exploitation. Cameroun produces
little from mining beyond some small amounts of gold, tin and
rutile. Though there has been no effective change in Mada-
gascar’s position, there have been discoveries of uranium,
monozite, zircon, chromium and other minerals, whose exploi-
tation is being investigated. Iron ore finds in Algeria are
estimated at 100 million tons, and we have been hearing a good
deal lately about the oil and gas resources of the Sahara desert.
Algeria’s fields are now producing at the rate of 450,000 barrels
a day (about a third of those of Iran), and Libya has reached
150,000 barrels daily, with the anticipation of achieving 600,000
barrels a day within the next five years. In Algeria’s sector of
the Sahara finds of minerals at Tindouf are expected to produce
50 per cent iron.

; The following figures, taken from UN Statistical Year-books,
illustrate the great rise in output of minerals in Africa in the
post-war period:

1945 1959
Morocco Phosphates (tons) | 1,654,000 7,164,000
Coal (tons) 178,000 465,000
Zinc (tons) 900 64,700
Congo (Leo.) Diamonds (carats) | 5,475,000 | 14,854,000
(1947 figure)
Copper (tons) — 280,000
Tin (tons) — 9,337
N. Rhodesia Copper (tons) 197,000 539,900
Zinc (tons) 15,500 30,000
Manganese (tons) 500 29,500
5. Rhodesia Coal (tons) | 1,669,000 3,758,000
Chrome (tons) 91,300 236,500
(1938 figure)
Asbestos (tons) 51,000 108,600
South Africa Gold (kg.) — 624,108
Diamonds (carats) — 2,838,000

 

 

 

 

The highest rate of increase is in South Africa, where a
production of 624,108 kg. of gold makes the Republic the
producer of half the world’s supplies. An output of 2,838,000
carats of diamonds in 1959, about 40 per cent of which were
gem stones, puts it third after the Congo and Ghana, whose
output is almost entirely of industrial diamonds, though the
value received, because of its control of the industry and the
number of gem diamonds, is relatively greater than that of
Ghana’s. She also leads in the production of chromium ore and
is second in the output of lead from S.W. Africa. Even South
Africa’s uranium production of 7,000 tons, obtained largely
from gold and copper slimes, is way ahead of the Congo’s
1,761 tons.

Mining of all kinds in South Africa has reached a stage of
exploitation which can be compared with that of Canada, and
which is now feverishly beginning to open up in Australia,
where the same companies, in alliance with American and other
associated interests, are paramount. The close relationship 1s
borne out even in the names of mines, particularly in Canada,
which frequently duplicate those also to be found in South
Africa and the Rhodesias.

Africa’s possession of industrial raw materials could, if used
for her own development, place her among the most modern-
ised continents of the world without recourse to outside sources.
Iron ore, mostly of high quality, is to be found in gigantic
quantities near to the coast where it can easily be shipped
abroad. As for bauxite, Africa’s estimated reserves are more
than two-fifths those of the whole world. They are twice those
of Australia, which are placed second. Guinea alone is estimated.
to contain deposits equal to those of the whole of Australia, that
is, over 1,000 million tons. Ghana is said to have reserves
totalling 400 million tons. Sudan, Cameroun, Congo and
Malawi are other known sources of considerable deposits, and
the investigation of probable reserves is proceeding in
Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Portuguese Guinea and in other
parts of Africa.

Among the base materials essential for the production of iron
and steel, manganese has a place of high importance. Besides
being used for alloying with pig iron in the manufacture of
special steels, it is used in the chemical industry. For certain
purposes, under present-day processes, manganese is irre-
placeable. It is in constant use at the rate of 18 to 20 kg. to a ton
of steel. The Soviet Union and China are practically self-
sufficient in the supply of this essential basic material. ‘The
other great world steel producers, the United States, Western
Europe and Japan, do not have appreciable quantities in their
own territories. Their principal sources of supply are Africa,
India and Brazil. Of these Africa provides the greatest quantity.
Angola, Bechuanaland, Congo, Ghana, Morocco, Rhodesia,
South-West Africa and Egypt have been among the producing
Countries for some time. Others, like the Ivory Coast and
Gabon, are now being added to the list.

North Africa is the world’s greatest producer of phosphates.
Morocco alone exports seven million tons out of some nine f
million tons coming from North Africa. The U.S.A. comes
next, with an export of four million tons. New producing
countries which have appeared since 1957 are China, with some
600,000 tons in 1960, and North Vietnam with 500,000 tons,
Senegal is a producer of aluminium phosphate, her output
being about 90,000 tons a year, and Togo is now appearing on
the phosphate market. i
Tron ore, like oil, has become one of the more recent mineral
discoveries in Africa, North and West Africa being the main
centres. Among high-grade ore producers in 1960 were Liberia
(68 per cent iron content), Angola (65 per cent), South Africa
(62 per cent), Sierra Leone (60 per cent), Morocco (60 per cent),
and Rhodesia (55 per cent, the minimum iron content for high-
grade ore). There have been discoveries of higher quantities
and quality since 1960. It is considered that most countries in &
West Africa, from Mauritania to Congo (Brazzaville) have iron
ore deposits. Enlargement of the production in Liberia, Guinea,
and Sierra Leone is being planned. Deposits are either being
placed under production or are planned for exploitation in
Nigeria, Niger, Mauritania, Ghana, Gabon, Cameroun, Senegal
and Congo (Brazzaville). Ghana’s reserves, estimated at about
a million tons, are in the Shiene area of the Northern Region,
and not easily accessible, and have an average iron content of
46 to 51 per cent. It is proposed to exploit the deposits for o
domestic use when the Volta lake is opened up for inland
transport. The Niger Republic deposits are estimated at more
than 100 million tons of 45 to 60 per cent quality. They are at
Say, about thirty-five miles from Niamey, at the moment
distant from roads, railways and ports. These disadvantages
affect also the exploitation of the known deposits in the Kandi
region of Dahomey, of 68 per cent quality.

Algeria has been an iron ore producer for some time. a
Exploitation was undertaken there in 1913 by a French enter-
prise known as La Société de l’Ouenza, operating at Djebel ¢

Ouenza in the south of Constantine, close to the Tunisian
border, formerly incorporated as a department of France. The
company has built its own railway lines connecting its two
producing centres to Oued-Keberit, to join with the Bone-
Tebessa line. Its plants enable Société de l’Quenza to export
iron principally to Great Britain, Germany, Italy, Belgium and
the Low Countries, and the U.S.A. Between the outset of this
exploitation and the end of 1960, a total of 46 million tons of
mineral has been extracted. Ouenza’s personnel then included
600 European and 1,500 Algerians.

The existence of iron ore in the Sahara was first indicated in
the Gara Djebilet region, some 110 miles south-east of Tindouf,
in 1952. Difficulties of situation and water supply are obstacles
in the way of exploitation. Nevertheless, a committee composed
of representatives of the iron and steel industries of France,
Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands is
busily investigating the possibilities, in conjunction with the
French Bureau d’Investissements en Afrique.

Liberia’s iron ore resources are reputed to stand at 1,000
million tons in the Nimba range and 600 million tons in the
deposits near the Sierra Leone border. The Nimba iron ore
mine which has been sunk and is being mined by a consortium
known as LAMCO Joint Venture Enterprise (members of the
consortium being Liberian-American-Swedish Minerals Com-
pany and Bethlehem Steel Corporation) is estimated to have
reserves of over 300 million tons of high-grade hematite ore
with an average iron content of over 65 per cent. Long-term
contracts are in hand from German, French, Italian and Belgian
steelworks, while a considerable part of the output will go to the
powerful United States Bethlehem Steel, which has a 25 per
cent participation in the venture, the other 75 per cent being
taken up by LAMCO. LAMCO is said to be a company shared
between the Liberian Government and foreign enterprise on a
fifty-fifty basis. The non-Government participant is Liberian
Iron Ore Company, a consortium of American and Swedish
financial and steel interests.

Chief of these is the Swedish mining company, Grangesberg,
which besides having an important stake in the LAMCO
Nimba mine acts as managing agent for this joint venture, in
which American capital predominates. Grangesberg, formerly
holding 12/28 of the LAMCO syndicate, according to its
annual report adopted at its annual general meeting held at
Stockholm, on 18 May 1962, increased its participation to
15/28, giving it a majority slice of the equity.

Grangesberg owns iron ore mines in Central Sweden, as well
as power stations, forest and farm properties. It also built and
controls the Frovi-Ludviks Jarnvag railway undertaking, and
operates the Oxelsund Ironworks, turning out pig iron and
heavy plates. In addition it possesses and runs a fleet of ships
which, at the end of 1961, comprised thirty-three vessels, and
had on order another four for delivery in 1962 and 1963. A
subsidiary, Aktiebolaget Hematit, works mines in North Africa,
and others include an arms and chemical enterprise, Aktie-
bolaget Express-Dynamit. The Swedish Government took
over holdings which Grangesberg exercised in Luossavaara-
Kurunavaara AB—LKAB, but out of the purchase price of
Kr. 925 million it received, the company reinvested Kr. 100
million in LKAB.

The value given to these Government-purchased holdings
was almost twice as much as Grangesherg’s fully paid-up
capital of Kr. 495,800,000, and even without them its assets at
the end of 1961 stood at Kr. 403,719,000 in addition to shares
in subsidiary and other companies totalling Kr. 154,380,000.
The company’s net profit for the year was Kr. 38,787,251
and dividends absorbed very nearly the same amount at
Kr. 35,700,000. Its iron sales increased from 1,620,000 tons in
1959 to 2,560,000 tons in 1961.

Bethlehem Steel is a heavy investment sphere for Rocke-
feller’s profits from Standard Oil, which has been pushing to
displace British-Dutch oil interests in the Far East. John D.
Rockefeller the Third has made himself a specialist on the Far
East, with a preference for Japan, where he was a member of
John Foster Dulles’ peace treaty mission in 1951. He estab-
lished the Japan Society Inc. for cultural inter-change. Per-
sistent visits and pressure have boosted Standard Oil Company’s
facilities in Japan, Indonesia, New Guinea and India in oil
production, refining and sales. The Rockefeller interest in
Japan is reflected in the link with the Sumitomo metallurgical
group, which has been cemented in the Bethlehem Copper
Corporation Ltd., a 1955 British Columbia (Canada) registra-
tion. Property claims in the Highland Valley of British
Columbia hold ore reserves of 3,304,000 tons grade 1-20 per
cent copper and 12,723,000 tons of 0-82 per cent grade.
Additional claims are held in the provinces as well as a full
subsidiary, Highland Valley Smelting and Refining Co.

Total output is to go to Sumitomo Metal Mining Co. Ltd.
group, which is responsible for bringing the property into
production. It has bought 400,000 shares in Bethlehem and has
options on further lots in connection with loan promises of
$5 million and an agreement to contribute one half of the funds
required for expansion. Sumitomo provides Bethlehem’s vice-
president and two other directors, one of whom is from the
prominent ‘Tanaka family. The first deliveries from the Nimba
mine were made during May 1963 and production of 7,500,000
tons is planned for 1965.

The Nimba iron ore streaks of Liberia stretch into Guinea
where prospecting is taking place in the Nimba-Simandou
region, about a thousand kilometres from Conakry, close to the
Liberia-Ivory Coast borders. A West European banking group
representing itself as the Consortium Européen pour le
Developpement des Ressources Naturelles de 1l’Afrique—
CONSAFRIQUE—is undertaking investigations by contract
with the Guinea Government. The group comprises:

Banque de I’Indochine, Paris.

Deutsche Bank A.G., Frankfurt/Main.

Hambros Bank, London.

Nederlandsche Handel-Maatschappij N.V., Amsterdam.

Société de Bruxelles pour la Finance et I’Industrie—
BRUFINA—Brussels.

S.A. Auxiliaire de Finance et de Commerce—AUXIFI—
Brussels.

Compagnie Franco-Americaine des Metaux et des
Minerais—COFRAMET—Paris.

The Banque de l’Indochine is closely associated with the
Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas, and has links with the Société
Générale de Belgique. Its original sphere of operations has been
largely closed by its exclusion from North Vietnam because of
the socialist regime established there, while in South Vietnam c
it has now become subordinate to American finance. The
Banque de l’Indochine, which already had a foothold in Algeria,
is turning more and more to Africa, where it is grouped in
several consortia, usually round the interests connected with
the Société Générale de Belgique, the Banque de Paris et des
Pays Bas and the Deutsche Bank, all leagued with Morgan
international interests. The Banque de |’Indochine is repre-
sented on the board of Le Nickel, which exploits a variety of
minerals in Asia and Oceania and has a substantial interest in
Compagnie Francaise des Minerais de l’Uranium. The late
H. Robiliart was another director on Le Nickel’s board, as well
as J. Puerarai from Penarroya and Les Mines de Huaron, whose
former president was the late H. Lafond of the Banque de Paris
et des Pays Bas. These and other allied French and American
interests, grouped around the Société des Minerais et Metaux,
Patino and American Metal Climax form the combination
known as COFRAMET, several of whom received Marshall b
Plan credits in the post-war years.

The Deutsche Bank, which has always concerned itself with
exploitation investment in the less developed areas, also has
close associations with the Banque de Paris. Even during the
war the Deutsche Bank did not relinquish its role of colonialist
exploiter, but followed the German army into the conquered
territories of Europe. Today it is busy pushing West German
interests in Africa, Panama, Chile, Pakistan, Columbia and
Puerto Rico. It has floated loans for Argentina, the City of Oslo
and Norway. It has a holding in the Pakistan Industrial Credit
and Investment Corporation Ltd. It has acted as fiduciary
house for such considerable international corporations as
General Motors, Philips, Royal Dutch Petroleum and Snia
Viscosa. The connection with Royal Dutch Petroleum con-
tinues Deutsche Bank’s association with the pre-first world war fs
Mosul oil concession in the part of Turkey that became Iraq,
while its activities on behalf of General Motors and Philips
emphasise the subservient role the Deutsche Bank plays to the
Morgan interests which conduct the international expansion of
these vast ramified organisations. On the board of this bank sit
directors of the Mannesmann steel interests of the Ruhr, also
represented on another German bank, the Dresdner, which is
also engaged in a number of investment ventures in Africa.

The Mannesmann steel company, one of the most important
in the German Ruhr, was established in 1885. Its chairman,
Dr Wilhelm Zanger, is a director of Algoma Steel Corpora-
tion Ltd. of Canada, in which the German interests were linked
for some time with the Hawker Siddeley group of Great
Britain. Mannesman is associated in several projects in India
and elsewhere with Krupps and its Duisberg affiliate Demag.
A. G. Demag works in close collaboration with the American
firm of Blaw Knox & Co. This firm which makes equipment
for steel mills and for chemical, petroleum and other industries
falls within the Mellon sphere of interests. Hence it has links
with Bethlehem Steel, which associates with the West German
Steel industry, into which the Mellon interests have increas-
ingly pushed. Both the Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank,
with which Mannesmann is so closely tied, in alliance with the
Morgan Guaranty Trust, have considerable interests in the
Oppenheimer companies of southern Africa.

Hambros Bank (the late Sir Charles Hambro was the
link with the Bank of England), Cable & Wireless (Holding)
and Oppenheimer holding companies have valuable interests
in the diamond, gold and other mining undertakings in

’ Central and Southern Africa. A merchant bank, Hambros
has long been associated with the Scandinavian investment
market, and has in the past years spread its activities in Europe
in anticipation of Britain’s entry into the Common Market. It
added a subsidiary in Zurich in 1962, Hambros Investment
Company. Like many other financial institutions it has entered
a growing field for finance investment, that of leasing equip-
ment to industry. For this purpose Hambros established
Equipment Leasing Company (Elco) in 1962. It also engages
directly in the business of importation and distribution of
motor cars and commercial vehicles from the British Motor
Corporation into the United States, through British Motor
Corporation-Hambros Inc., a joint fifty-fifty venture. The
British Motor Corporation covers Austin, M.G., Morris, Riley,
Wolseley motors and subsidiary companies of the Nufheld and t
other groups. Through its acquisition of the banking firm of
Laidlaw & Co., New York, Hambros is strengthening its
associations with important American banking interests. Among
Hambros Bank’s many other interests is its connection with the
bullion firm of Mocatta & Goldsmid, which increased its
holdings of bullion in 1961 from £3,750,000 to £6,500,000.

Another financial-industrial group, headed by the British
company, B.I.S.C. (Ore) Ltd., and including French, German
and American financial participants, is already working iron ore
deposits in Guinea at Kaloum, in immediate proximity to the
port of Conakry. These deposits of 50-55 per cent grade ore
were discovered in 1904, when construction of the railway line
from Conakry to Niger was begun. Prospecting was carried out
between 1919 and 1922 by the Mining Company of French
Guinea. In 1948 a new company was formed to confirm previ-
ous findings. This was the Compagnie Miniére de Conakry,
whose plant at Kaloum is geared to an annual production of
1,200,000 tons, which can be doubled without any appreciable
modifications of the set-up. Alongside its iron production, this
company is multiplying its income from the establishment of a
complex of industries which includes the manufacture of
explosives by the L’Union Chimique de lOuest Africain—
UCOA. Participation in the Compagnie Minitre de Conakry,
which is capitalised at 1,500 million Guinea francs, is as
follows:

B.I.S.C. (Ore) Ltd. 30-50%
Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Miniéres 24-70%
Caisse Centrale de Co-operation Economique 8-70%
Compagnie Frangaise des Mines de Bor 7:90%
Hoesch Werke 500%
Rothschild Group 9-56%
Compagnie Franco-Americaine des Metaux et

des Minerais—COFRAMET 2:05%
Various 11-59%

Hoesch Werke is a leading West German iron and steel firm,
associated with the larger combines like Mannesmann and
Phoenix-Rheinruhr, the last of which has lately effected a fusion
with the Thyssen group. Before the last war Thyssen was
associated with Krupp.

The West German iron and steel industry is looking increas-
ingly for raw materials supplies for use in German plants. In
other parts of the world where less developed countries are
making an attempt to industrialise, they are setting up transfor-
mation foundries and rolling mills to bring to secondary and
intermediate stages ores brought in from mines to which they
have been granted concessions. Thus the Mannesmann affiliate
in Brazil, Companhia Siderurgica Mannesmann, is to achieve a
crude steel capacity of 300,000 tons from iron ores from its
mines less than five miles from a new blast furnace it is erecting
at Belo Horizonte. American capital has large holdings in the
German iron and steel industry, in some cases a controlling une,
achieved during the post-war American occupation of Western
Germany.

The Morgan banks led this incursion into the West German
and other European heavy industry fields, using their European
agents and associates in Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy,
Belgium and Switzerland for the purpose. Among these associ-
ates is the multiple Rothschild group, already flanking the
Morgans in their Southern African ventures. The British
section, headed by N. M. Rothschild, has, in the words of one
commentator, the Hon. Peter Montefiore Samuel, a member of
the London merchant banking house of M. Samuel & Co. Ltd.,
‘re-established their ancient connections with de Rothschild
Fréres’, which go back to the pre-Napoleonic days. The firm of
M. Samuel is itself linked with the Banque Lambert of Belgium
and the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas of France, all within
the investment sphere of the Société Générale de Belgique, in
an investment consortium established to exploit the European
Common Market. Edmund L. de Rothschild and the Hon.
P. M. Samuel sit together on the board of Anglo Israel
Securities Ltd. De Rothschild, a director of two insurance
Companies, the Alliance and Sun Alliance created by the
Rothschilds, sits also on the board of the British Newfoundland
Corporation, incorporated in Canada, which secured 7,000
Square miles of concessionary mineral lands and an additional
like extent of oil and gas concessions from the Newfoundland
Government, in 1953. The corporation also holds concessions
on 35,000 square miles in Labrador. The same de Rothschild
further adorns the board of Five Arrows Securities Co. Ltd., of
Toronto, in which Barclays Bank and Morgan associates are
interested. The Hon. P. M. Samuel is a director of the Shell
Oil holding company, Shell Transport & Trading Co. Ltd., as
well as of other investment companies, including several
operating in Central Africa, such as Heywood Investments
Central Africa (Pvt.) Ltd., on which he is joined by another
member of the family, the Hon. Anthony Gerald Rothschild,
who also sits on the boards of other such concerns, as well as of
publishing and publicity firms.

B.I.S.C. (Ore) Ltd. is also included in a consortium, Société
Anonyme des Mines de Fer de Mauritainie—-MIFERMA—
exploiting iron ore at Fort Gouraud, Mauritania. It is estimated
that there is a minimum of 100 million tons of high-grade ore
of 64-65 per cent iron contained in this property on the western
edge of the Sahara Desert, and it is being prepared to produce
an annual output of six million tons. The British group as well
as German and Italian groups have substantial holdings, but
the major interest is held by a French group headed by the
Bureau Miniere de France d’Outre Mer. The following are the
participants in this venture:

B.1.S.C. (Ore) Ltd.

British Ore Investment Corporation Ltd.

British Steel Corporation Ltd.

Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Nord.

Compagnie Financiére pour l’Outremer-—-COFIMER.
Denain-Anzain.

Republique Islamique de Mauritanie.

Societa Financiaria Siderurgica—FINSIDER.

Societa Mineraria Siderurgica—FERROMIN.

Union Siderurgique du Nord de la France—USINOR.

The company has been capitalised at 13,300 million francs
CFA, and has the following affiliates:

Société d’Acconage et de Manutention en Mauritanie—
SAMMA (capital: 100,000,000 francs CFA).

Société Anonyme d’Hebergement en Mauritanie—
HEBERMA (capital: 25,000,000 francs CFA).

Société Anonyme de Transports Mauritaniens—
SOTRAM (capital: 50,000,000 drancs CFA).

And to prove that though the names may change the com-
ponents remain the same, the management of the mine will be
in charge of Penarroya.

Finsider is the financing organisation related with the
industrial group comprising Ferromin; and the Deutsche Bank
was concerned with certain share introductions made by it
during 1961-2. The Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Nord
comes within the influence of the Banque de Paris et des Pays
Bas, as does Union Siderurgique du Nord de la France.

Gabon, whose timber has hitherto been its main export, has
shown signs of possessing iron ore deposits since 1895. Investi-
gations were carried out from 1938 by what was then the
French Overseas Mining Bureau, transferred later to the Bureau
de Recherches Geologiques et Miniéres, and joined by the
Bethlehem Steel Company. The resultant company, Société des
Mines de Fer de Mekambo, was established in 1955, with the
major purpose of ‘creating a great centre of production capable
of satisfying, at long term, a part of the anticipated needs of
Western Europe’s steel industry and the future requirements of
Bethlehem Steel’. Thus, in the participation, Bethlehem Steel

has a 50 per cent holding. The other parties to the undertaking
are:

Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Miniéres 12-00%
Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas 500%
Compagnie Financiére pour l’Outremer—COFIMER  3-00%
Compagnie Financiére de Suez 500%
Fiat Company, Italy 350%
German Consortium of Mekambo (German steel

industry) 10-00%
French steel industry 9-00%
Belgian steel industry 200%
Dutch steel industry 0-50%

The undertaking is capitalised at 200 million francs CFA,
and on its behalf further investigations have been undertaken
by the syndicate grouped round the Bureau de Recherches and ‘
the European Coal and Steel Community, underlining the
interest that the European Community and its Common Market
has in Africa’s primary resources. What makes Gabon’s iron ore
deposits so interesting is their proximity to important electrical
power resources, capable of affording abundant electricity at an
estimated rate of one franc CFA per kilowatt.

Fiat’s inclusion in this consortium is an illustration of the
inevitability of monopoly’s extension into capital investment in
less developed countries. Fiat is not simply an automobile
producing company, but a vast industrial organisation which
has penetrated deeply into financial investment in Europe and
beyond. Founded in Turin in 1899, Fiat had grown in sixty-
three years into the second-largest motor manufacturer in
Europe and the fourth largest in the world after General
Motors, Ford and Volkswagen. If Simca, which is linked with
Fiat, is added to Fiat’s production, it is larger than that of
Volkswagen. But Fiat’s growth came, not through automobile
manufacturing, but through industrial production connected
with armaments during the first world war, its expansion con-
tinuing in the second world war. It made profit out of the
devastation that came to Italy and continued to build itself up
in the post-war period under its founder, an ex-cavalry officer
of a well-to-do Turin family, Giovanni Agnelli, in whom
‘business genius was combined with the ruthlessness of an
American railroad or oil tycoon of the old days’.

In its working year of 1960 the Fiat company had invest-
ments in other companies valued at some £26,700,000, a
valuation decided by the company, since under Italian company
law this is left entirely to ‘the discretion of the company’s
accountants, and figures listed in Italian balance sheets under ‘
this heading usually bear no relation whatsoever to the market
value or even to the face value of the equities and bonds held’.
Cement, camera and film manufacture are among the company’s
ventures. A subsidiary, Unione Cementi Marchino, produces
16 million tons of cement yearly. The Cinzano vermouth which
is so widely enjoyed throughout the world is among Fiat’s
undertakings. Its subsidiary, Impresit, is busy wherever hydro-
electrical dams are being constructed. It built the Kariba dam
in Rhodesia and is working on Ghana’s Volta dam. Fiat owns
property all over the world. Practically the whole of the Rue
Blanche in Paris’s notorious night-life world is owned by Fiat,
as well as land, hotels and pleasure facilities in Sestriere, a
leading Italian winter sports resort.

Like so many of the monopoly organisations that spread their
interests over the globe and into manifold undertakings, Fiat
has branched into oil, having a 22 per cent holding in Aquila,
the Italian subsidiary of the Compagnie Francaise des Petroles.
Aquila is now operating in Austria as well as Italy. Shipping
also comes within Fiat’s operational sweep through ownership
of a couple of shipping companies. All of these ramifications,
which cover more than a hundred companies inside and outside
Italy, are almost all vested in the holding company, Instituto
Financiario Industriale, founded in 1927, and known briefly as
J.F.I. In the latter part of 1962 Fiat joined the international
group comprising S.A.B.C.A.—Avions Fairey (Belgium),
Breguet (France), Focke-Wulf (Germany), Fokker (Holland),
Hawker Siddeley Aviation (U.K.) and Republic Aviation
(U.S.A.), which submitted designs to NATO for a vertical
take-off strike aircraft. Fiat had already maintained co-operation
with Bristol Siddeley in the manufacture of Bristol Siddeley
Orpheus turbo-jet engines for the G.91, then the standard
NATO strike aircraft. And to help mould public opinion in the
right direction, Fiat publishes Italy’s second largest daily paper,
La Stampa.

Compagnie Financiére de Suez was in considerable difficulty
after the affairs of the Suez Canal were taken over by the
Egyptian Government, following the unsuccessful attempt
by Anglo-French imperialism to dominate Egypt once more,
and has been under pressure from its shareholders. How-
ever, the board held off the shareholders and righted its
Position by looking for investments which will give quick
high returns. It has made certain equity purchases in
Australia, but is really seeking quick profitability in Saharan
oil and African primary materials. Its investment in Coparex
is expected to give early good results, since this company
had in 1961 large reserves of oil from which it was deriving
a substantial income.

Bauxite in Western and Equatorial Africa is even more
plentiful than iron ore, but its exploitation is waiting upon the
availability of electrical power. We have already referred to
FRIA, the enterprise that has been set up in the Republic of
Guinea by the consortium with the Rockefeller firm of Olin
Mathieson at its head. The second largest holding in this group
is held by Pechiney-Ugine. These same groups, together with
Reynolds, Kaiser and Mellon’s Alcan, formed another enter-
prise, Les Bauxites du Midi, which originally exploited other
deposits at Kassa and Boke. Notice, however, was given to the
company by the Guinea Government that if, within three
months from 24 November 1961 Bauxites du Midi had not
made arrangements to set up an aluminium factory at Boke by
July 1964, as originally agreed, its installations, works and
machinery would be expropriated, as well as its assets, for
which reparation would be made. The Guinea Government
declared that it waited for the company to renounce ‘its colonial
methods based on the simple extraction of minerals whose
transformation would be subsequently effected outside the
country of production’.

Pechiney-Ugine is also concerned with the Compagnie
Camerounaise d’Aluminium Pechiney-Ugine—ALUCAM—in
which a 10 per cent participation is held by Cobeal, a Société
Générale de Belgique affiliate. Pechiney-Ugine’s share of
Alucam’s total production in 1962 of 52,246 tons was 46,443
tons, obviously the most important.

Gabon’s natural resources are proving immensely rich.
Atomic energy commissions are busy prospecting and investi-
gating uranium sources at Mounana in the Haut-Ogooue
region, one of the most isolated in the country. The only means
of access is the river Ogooue, cut by rapids over more than
600 km. of its length. At the beginning of 1959, however, a
100-km. road, constructed by the Compagnie Miniére de
V?’Ogooue—COMILOG—put the terminus of the railway which
opened in 1962 about 120 km. from Mounana, thus making it
more accessible. The ore is to be mined and uranated by the
Compagnie des Mines d’Uranium de Franceville, capitalised at
1,000 million francs CFA. A participant in Comilog, the
Compagnie de Mokta, is responsible for the management of the
mine. Comilog is exploiting Gabon’s manganese deposits at
Franceville, which were first investigated by the French Over-
seas Mining Bureau in collaboration with U.S. Steel, the
mammoth American steel firm, controlled by Morgan interests.
Together with its affiliates, U.S. Steel has 49 per cent control
of Comilog, to which the other parties are the frequently-
present Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Miniéres (22 per
cent), the Compagnie de Mokta (14 per cent) and the Société
Auxiliaire du Manganese de Franceville (15 per cent). The
enterprise is capitalised at 2,500,000 francs CFA. United States
and French monopolists are the chief parties to Comilog.
Comilog has as its principal shareholder (49 per cent) the
largest steel outfit in America, and hence the world, U.S. Steel,
‘a perfectly integrated iron and steel concern’. The manganese
bed on which Comilog is working at Franceville in Gabon is
one of the most important in the world, with estimated reserves
of 200 million tons of 50 per cent ore. The French Cie de
Mokta has a 19 per cent interest and, besides being concerned
in operating directly the Grand Lahou manganese mine on the
Ivory Coast, controls important production of iron, manganese
and uranium ores through holdings in Algeria, Spain, Tunisia,
Moroccoand Gabon. It has, for instance, 40 per cent in the Cie des
Mines d’Uranium de Franceville, which is developing the rich
uranium mine at Mounana, Gabon. De Mokta is linked directly
and by associates with interests radiating from Anglo-American
Corporation and the great iron and steel trust of ARBED.
U.S. Steel and General Electric are world giants in their
related spheres. The first, by virtue of its multiple divisions
covering all aspects of the steel industry, is the sixth largest
industrial company in the United States; the second is the
leading producer of electrical equipment and appliances in the
world, with affiliates, subsidiaries and associates all over the
globe. Its plants affect many sectors of industry: radio, aviation,
Marine, scientific research, and turn out heavy capital goods,
industrial components and materials and defence products, as
well as consumer goods. U.S. Steel was founded in 1901 by
J. Pierpont Morgan as a holding company controlling over half
the American steel industry. Since then the American steel
industry has expanded by giant strides and other commanding
trusts have forged ahead. But U.S. Steel leads still and today
controls 30 per cent of America’s steel and cement production.
On the board of General Electric sits Henry S. Morgan, so that
it is not difficult to find the relationship between this inter-
national monopoly and U.S. Steel in the exploitation of some of
Africa’s richest resources to feed the military as well as eco-
nomic demands of the world’s most dangerous imperialism.
Operating universally, its interests are located at every crisis
point of the globe.

It is said that as a result of the most complicated transaction,
Tanganyika Concessions ceded to an American financial group
closely associated with the leading United States banking
houses 1,600,000 of its shares, as a result of which the American
group probably has a majority in this British Company which
owns 21] per cent of the sharcs of Union Miniére, whose empire
is the Congo.*

American interest in the Congo is motivated by very sub-
stantial investments, frequently hidden behind British, French,
Belgian and West German cover, and engaging leading person-
alities in United States political affairs. Mr Adlai Stevenson, for
instance, representing his government at U.N.O., presided
over the firm of Tempelsman & Son, specialists in exploiting
Congo diamonds; and Mr Arthur H. Dean, who leads
America’s delegations to disarmament conferences, was vice-
president and still is a director of American Metal Climax, a
huge consumer of uranium, since it provides 10 per cent of
United States production. American Metal, according to an
information blurb, forms with its subsidiaries ‘a powerful
international mining group, which includes, notably, Rhodesian
Selection Trust Ltd.’.

The NATO powers are interested in Gabon because of her
riches, At present American OFFSHORE International has
been offered a drilling contract for Société de Petrol Afrique

* France Observateur, 9 July 1964.

Equatorial (SPAFE) with headquarters in Port Gentil. This
company employs over 1,200 Africans who are all subordinate
to the over 400 white people. There is no oil refinery at present
in Gabon, but Gabon, Chad, Congo, Brazzaville, Central
African Republic and Cameroun have agreed to establish a
refinery to be financed by their respective governments and
France. The first meeting of the representatives of these
governments was on 22 July 1964 in Port Gentil. According to
the Minister the necessary investigations are going on to start

- the refinery before the end of 1965. There are, I was told, many
oil finds both in the territorial waters of Gabon and deep in the
interior in large economic quantities to supply many parts of
Africa. My information is that all the petroleum companies now
distributing oil in French-speaking Africa have controlling
shares in the oil production company in Gabon. Agip is not
allowed to hold shares in the company. Readers will recall what
caused the downfall of Mr Adoula in the Congo—oil politics.
It seems to me, therefore, that two economic issues will
influence the duration of French occupational forces in Gabon
for many years, namely uranium and oil.

It is quite likely that Africa could provide enough phosphates
not only to fertilise the abundant agricultural production that
would cover its future food and industrial requirements, but to
leave enough over to supply the needs of many other parts of
the globe. At the moment important centres of phosphates are
the Djebel-Onk deposits in Algeria, those at Taiba in Senegal,
at Lac Togo in the Republic of Togo, and at Khouribga and
Youssoufia in Morocco.

The Société de Djebel-Onk, with a capital of 30 million new
francs, comprises the following interests:

Bureau d’Investissement en Afrique 18-00%
Caisse d’Equipement de l’Algérie 16-00%
Compagnie des Phosphates de Constantine 40-00%
Compagnie Financiére pour le Developpement
Economique, ca.—COFIDAL 8:50%
Société Algérienne de Development et d’Expansion
—SOCALDEX 8-50%

Société Algérienne de Produits Chimiques et
d’Engrais; Banque Nationale pour le Commerce
et l’Industrie Afrique; Compagnie Algérienne;
Groupe Schiaffino; Various 9-:00%

The Compagnie Senegalaise des Phosphates de Taiba finds
the Government of Senegal associating with the Bureau de
Recherches Geologiques et Miniéres, Pechiney, Pierrefitte,
Compagnie des Phosphates de Constantine, Compagnie des
Phosphates d’Oceanie, Cofimer and the Société Auxon. The
same group, headed by the Banque de Paris et des Pays
Bas and the French interests which it represents made an
agreement in February 1963, under the signature of the
bank’s director-general, J. J. Reyre, with the International
Minerals & Chemicals Corporation, by which the latter
became a partner in the consortium which is exploiting what
is said to be the world’s largest high-grade phosphate mine,
near Dakar. There are several things that are noteworthy in
this arrangement.

First of all, there is something distinctly ominous in an
agreement between two foreign combinations, one of which is
a participant in a company associated with the State whose raw
materials it is exploiting. It accentuates the contemptuous
attitude towards the host country implicit in the monopoly’s
purpose. International Minerals is the foremost producer of
phosphate and phosphate agricultural products in the North
American continent, with extensive phosphate mining and.
chemical processing operations in Florida, U.S.A. It also owns
a potash mine at Carlsbad, New Mexico, and another
$10 million potash project in Canada. It has a market for its
products throughout the Americas and Western Europe. For
the Senegalese Government this phosphate mining project,
which is to have an output of 500,000 tons a year, has an
important place in its four-year plan. It is intended to broaden
and develop the economy. However, the purpose of the
monopolies controlling the venture is entirely otherwise. “This
partnership bolsters our world position in regard to strategic
phosphate reserves,’ Mr Reyre is reported to have said on
signing the partnership agreement with International Minerals
(West Africa, 17 February 1962).

Phosphates deposits were uncovered in Togo about eighteen
miles from the sea in 1952. Investigations had been going on
since 1884 by French and British interests. It was a geological
adviser of the Comptoir des Phosphates de |’Afrique du Nord
who found in the Akoumape region indications of very impor-
tant deposits of first quality which extend across Lake Togo.
The Republic of Togo has associated itself with the Compagnie
Togolaise des Mines de Benin, which is exploiting the deposits,
and comprises the interests already engaged in monopolising
other phosphate resources in Africa. These are the Compagnie
Constantine, Penarroya, Cofimer, the Banque de Paris, Pierre-
fitte and the Compagnie Internationale d’Armement Maritime
Industrielle et Commerciale. Capital is 1,180 million francs
CFA. The first shipments were made in September 1961, when
they left the new wharf of Kpeme for the United States and
American-controlled plants in Japan. The plan is to produce
initially 750,000 tons of concentrate yearly, a level it is intended
to raise progressively to a million tons if the market possibilities
are there.

There would be no lack of market possibilities if fertilisers
were made available to the developing countries at prices which
their purchasing power could afford. As it is, the competition in
fertilisers from America and other sources is extremely keen,
and the British producers, of whom Fison Ltd. and I.C.I. and
Shell practically monopolise the trade in the United Kingdom,
were the subject of investigation by the British Monopolies
Commission in 1959. Fertilisers in the U.K. have been kept at
a subsidised price level that led to serious complaints of over-
charging. Fison holds 40 per cent of the U.K. market, and it
has now entered into an agreement with I.C.I., whereby it will
be supplied by the latter with ammonia from their new
Immingham plant. This will cut costs in an effort to meet
shareholders’ complaints of diminishing profits.

This co-operation of the largest producers of fertilisers is
going on in order to monopolise raw materials’ supplies and
markets, so as to sustain prices that will yield higher profits on
the considerable investments involved. The chairman of I.C.I.’s
Billingham Division said the company’s steam naptha process
has completely transformed the economics of ammonia pro-
duction and has put the company in the position of being a
world producer of ammonia, not just a U.K. producer.

Transportation is an important factor in the cost of fertilisers,
and it is easy to appreciate that if phosphates from Africa are
taken to Europe for working up and then returned in fertiliser
form to Africa, packed in bags, prices cannot be economic for
African agriculture. In this connection it is interesting to note
that Fison have established in India, in association with the
leading iron and steel firm of Tata, a fertiliser producing
company, Tata-Fison Ltd., which Sir Clavering Fison, the
U.K. Company’s chairman, has described as now being the
largest company in the industry. Fison has a partnership in
Albatros Super-fosfaatbrieken N.V., of Utrecht, Holland, with
which company it established fertiliser and chemical companies
in South Africa. During their financial year 1961-2 the Fison-
Albatros company admitted into its South African afhiliate,
Fisons (Pty) Ltd., a local banking undertaking, Federale
Volksbeleggings Beperk, which made enough funds available
to allow the South African Fison company to enter upon the
exploitation of phosphate deposits at Phalaborwa in the Trans-
vaal. Fison has other companies in South Africa concerned.
with agricultural chemicals and pharmaceuticals. All these
companies did well during the 1961-2 year, according to
Fison’s chairman, who added that ‘despite the difficult con-
ditions in East Africa and the Federation of Rhodesia and
Nyasaland, our companies there have maintained their position
and earned satisfactory profits’. Its subsidiary in Sudan, Fisons
Pest Control (Sudan) Ltd., sprayed a record cotton acreage of
over one million acres and achieved profits found satisfactory
by the chairman.

Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Malaya and Nigeria are all
countries in which Fison have established companies for the
expansion of their fertiliser and agricultural chemical markets,
and they have recently begun to extend into South America and
Pakistan. Plants for the manufacture of fertilisers have been
erected at Zandvoorde, in Belgium, jointly with Union
Chimique Belge S.A. Besides fertilisers and related chemicals
manufacture, horticulture and scientific apparatus production,
Fison are in the food processing and canning firm of John
Brown Ltd. ‘for the purpose of selling chemical know-how and
plants to the U.S.S.R.’.

Oil and gas, which are becoming more and more important
finds in Africa, particularly in the Sahara, are drawing the
feverish competition of the predominant financial and industrial
interests that are bringing monopoly into a tighter and tighter
ring. Even smaller ones are pushing into this field, which, while
it calls for extremely heavy initial capital for prospecting and
sounding, offers the fabulous profits that have built up the
fortunes of Standard Oil and Mobil-Socony for the Rocke-
fellers, Gulf Oil for the Mellons, Continental Oil and Dutch-
Shell for the Morgans, Texaco for the Chicago group, Hanover
Bank and others. Tennessee Corporation, the Guggenheimer
multiple enterprise operating nitrate and copper concessions in
South America and holdings in the Congo and other parts of
Africa, has extended its interests beyond uranium, fertilisers
and chemicals into oil. Its Delaware subsidiary, Tennessee
Overseas Co., has started upon oil exploration in Sierra Leone.
C. W. Michel, Tennessee’s vice-president is already connected
with oil through Dome Petroleum, a subsidiary of the Americo-
Canadian Dome Mines Ltd., interlocked with Tennessee by
shareholding and Michel’s chairmanship.

Africa is still paramountly an uncharted continent economi-
cally, and the withdrawal of the colonial rulers from political
control is interpreted as a signal for the descent of the inter-
national monopolies upon the continent’s natural resources.
This is the new scramble for Africa, under the guise of aid,
and with the consent and even the welcome of young,
mexperienced States. It can be even more deadly for Africa
than the first carve-up, as it is supported by more concentrated
interests, wielding vastly greater power and influence over
governments and international organisations.

7. The Oppenheimer empire

THE king of mining in South Africa, indeed in Africa, is Harry
Frederick Oppenheimer. One might almost call him the king
of South Africa, even the emperor, with an ever-extending
empire. There is probably hardly a corner of Southern Africa’s
industrial and financial structure in which he has not got a
very extended finger of his own or the hook of some affiliate or
associate. These fingers and hooks attach the Oppenheimer
empire firmly to other empires as great or greater.

Mr Harry Frederick Oppenheimer is director, chairman or
president of some seventy companies. These directorships as
well as those held by important colleagues and nominees,
whose names recur monotonously on the boards of an ever-
expanding complex of company boards, give the lie to the
fiction of respectable separateness, even where there is no
obvious financial connecting link. Dominating this complex
of companies are the Anglo American Corporation of South
Africa Ltd. and Consolidated Gold Fields of South Africa
Ltd., from which radiate affiliates, subsidiaries, associates,
immediately or more tenuously connected, which would
provide in themselves a most interesting trade, investment and
banking directory. A list of direct interests, by no means
complete, would include:

 

Anglo American Trust Ltd.
African & European Investment Co. Ltd.
Amalgamated Collieries of South Africa Ltd.

Bamangwato Concessions Ltd.

Central Mining Finance Ltd.

Consolidated Mines Selection Co. Ltd. (C.A.S.T.).
Coronation Collieries Ltd.

Consolidated Mines of South West Africa Ltd.
British South Africa Company Ltd.

Anglo Transvaal Consolidated Investment Co. Ltd.
De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd.

Free State Development Co. Ltd.

Middle Witwatersrand (Western Areas) Ltd.

Rand Selection Corporation Ltd.

Rand Mines Ltd.

Rhodesian Anglo American Corporation Ltd.
South African Townships Mining & Finance Co. Ltd.
Vereeniging Estates Ltd.

West Rand Investment Trust Ltd.

Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Co. Ltd.
Rhodesian Broken Hill Development Co. Ltd.
Transvaal & Delagoa Bay Investment Co. Ltd.
Rhokana Corporation Ltd.

Union Corporation Ltd.

Tsumeb Corporation Ltd.

Selection Trust Co. Ltd.

Tanganyika Concessions Ltd.

Union Miniére du Haut Katanga S.A.

Most of these are holding or investment outfits, established
to co-ordinate a specific group of activities, but having their
fingers in many other pies. It is difficult, almost impossible at
times, to distinguish a delimiting line of operation. Trying to
unravel the participations of the Anglo American Corporation
and Consolidated Gold Fields of South Africa, for instance,
leads often to the same involvements. Yet there must be a
demarcation line, not only to preserve the semblance of
autonomy, but to avoid a duplication of tasks and responsi-
bilities in the interests of industrial and financial economy and
profits.

As a matter of fact there is a constant rearrangement of
organisational structure, either as a result of the acquisition of
hew interests and projects, the abandonment of exhausted
mines, the expansion of existing companies and alliances, but
above all in order to forestall or meet competition, to stream-
line the structure and to correct the tax position.

For instance, in 1961, Consolidated African Gold Fields of
South Africa Corporation underwent a thorough-going re-
organisation with the intention of concentrating its adminis-
tration in its various spheres of operation. Reporting to the
annual meeting of the corporation’s activities for the year
ending 30 June 1961, the chairman, Sir George Harvie-Watt,
fixed the assets, at stock exchange value, at a total of approxi-
mately £58 million. Sixty-six per cent of this total was
represented by interests in South Africa, ten per cent in
North America and six per cent in Australia. Most of the
remaining 18 per cent was accounted for by interests in the
United Kingdom.

To supervise these interests and the planned absorption of
others, a number of changes were made in the controlling
companies, so that the group structure of Consolidated Gold
Fields of South Africa Ltd. now has the appearance shown in
Chart 1.

Explaining the structure to the shareholders at the annual
general meeting held in London on 13 December 1962, the
chairman confirmed that the operational supervision of the
group’s interests in South Africa was the responsibility of “our
wholly owned subsidiary, Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd.,
which is resident in Johannesburg’. When in 1959 the group
acquired both New Union Gold Fields, since renamed Gold
Fields Finance (S.A.) Ltd., and the South African H.E.
Proprietary Ltd., their management was also vested in
Gold Fields of South Africa, although the shares of these
companies were held directly by the parent company in
London.

In Australia, responsibility for administration of the group’s
operations is exercised by Consolidated Gold Fields (Australia)
Pty Ltd. Gold Fields’ principal investment in Australia is
represented by a majority interest in Commonwealth Mining
Investments (Australia) Ltd., “a mining finance company,
which has a broadly based portfolio in Australian, North

112

 

 

 

 
"PT oonqury
“pyT oseuun[ yy

 

b LYVHO

 

 
 
 

‘PYT vorEI2

  

 

*prT “Ag (isny
SPP POD
peeplposuor) MON

 

 

“PIT Casny)

 

 

 

 

 

‘PYT ssurpjoy

 

SPP PISD

 

[etsnpuy

 

 

3)89J9}UT “SIF

BdYJO 0JU0IO J,

$}S919}UI YPIPBULD

 

S}USWSIAUT surly

“PT parepljosuod
S[PISUITAL
poqerossy

 

 

YyeomUOUIWOT)

 

 

 

 

BOTY YINos
ul satueduroo
Jay}0 puke ssoueULy

 

 

[PYT “Ad (38ny) spreta plod pareprosucg

ajo Aeupsg

ssola]Ul uetTeIsny

 

 

‘OU OUIZ
areIg-1 |,

‘uintuesy) ‘plory jo
vorea}sIuIWIpY

 

py] Areyotidoig
“AH Ueolyy YINS

 

 

 

 

“PYT (W'S)

 

| ‘ouy ‘OD Suls9UIsUq Heng |

‘Od soueULy

 

 

 

 

 

uoneiodio,y) uroWewYy

SPP plod

 

 

|

——— S}S91O}UT UBITIOULY

|

 

 

 

 

SPP PlOD

 

 

 

 

J
WO amgsouueyo f{

S$]SoIOJUT UBOLIFY UIOyNG

 

CMA) ‘pyT felasnpuy
29 SUIUITAL SPILT Plod
L

 

 

(A) “pryT Aouesy
peorsinypeyayAy 2g Bururypy
i

 

 

CIO) py] “op vuonesojdxg (WS) ‘py] eoysy

Yanog Jo SPILT PIOD

 

 

 

 

youary-oysuy oy L,
I J

 

LNOGNO7T Ni SYOLOaNIG AO Guvod]

 

PONT] COMFY UNOS JO Spjeld Plo} peyepljosuos oy L

113
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

American and other overseas investments’, according to the
chairman’s report.

A majority interest in another Australian concern, Associated
Minerals Consolidated Ltd., gives Consolidated Gold Fields a
big break into the rutile and zircon industry. Associated
Minerals acquired all the outstanding shares of Z.R. Holdings
Ltd., a company originally formed to take possession of Zircon
Rutile Pty Ltd., together with that company’s share in, and
advances to other companies. About the same time, Associated
Minerals bought the entire share capital of Titanium Materials
and the assets of Rye Park Scheelite.

Experienced enterprises like Consolidated Gold Fields do
not allow others to benefit from their efforts. So ‘while
Associated Minerals was building up its holdings in the rutile
industry’, stated Consolidated’s chairman, ‘we felt it necessary
to strengthen our position in Wyong Minerals, another rutile
producer in which Commonwealth Mining already had a
substantial investment. Accordingly, our wholly-owned sub-
sidiary, Consolidated Gold Fields (Australia) Pty Ltd., made
an offer in February 1962 for 50 per cent of all shareholdings
in Wyong Minerals other than those held by Commonwealth
Mining Investments. This offer was successful and Wyong
Minerals is now a subsidiary within the group.’

Congratulations are owed to Consolidated Gold Fields on
their perspicacity. Their position in the rutile field is now
pre-eminent. In the words of their chairman, ‘the total rutile
productive capacity of our subsidiaries now represents close
on one half of the total free world capacity. The expansion
programme which Associated Minerals now has in hand
should maintain this position.” May we be forgiven if the
qualification ‘free’ in this context looks a trifle dulled to us?

Rutile is a much sought-after material used in the manu-
facture of titanium pigment. The demand had the effect of
increasing its open market price by some 50 per cent in the
financial year 1961/62. Zircon’s price has remained stable in
spite of considerably increased supplies.

A partnership with Cyprus Mines Corporation, a New York
company, and the Utah Construction & Mining Co. of San
Francisco, has resulted in a joint enterprise named Mount
Goldsworthy Mining Associates, to explore and work the
potential of iron ore deposits of Mount Goldsworthy in
north-western Australia. The construction of a 125-mile
railway is involved, to end up at Depuch Island, where a
major seaport is under consideration. Sir George Harvie-Watt
was pleased to inform Consolidated Gold Fields’ shareholders
that ‘negotiations are in progress with the Japanese iron and
steel industry regarding the market for this ore (from Mount
Goldsworthy) which is thought will be competitive in price
and quality with any now available in Japan.’

In the chairman’s words, the company’s operations in
Canada had ‘taken a distinct step forward’. Their subsidiary
exploration company, Newconex Canadian Exploration Ltd.,
was joined by a second, Newconex Holdings Ltd. A decision
was made to allow the public to enjoy some of the fruits from
the exploitation of their country’s resources by foreign con-
cerns. Accordingly, 36 per cent of the capital was offered to
Canadians. Those who took up shares were doubtless delighted
to know that the 284 per cent holding of Newconex Canadian
Exploration Ltd. in the Mount Hundere exploration will be
turned over to the holding company. A high grade deposit of
lead zinc (with some silver) discovered in this south Yukon
region inspired the chairman to an admission of its being
‘most gratifying that so soon after its formation Newconex
Holdings should be presented by Newconex Exploration with
such an encouraging prospect.’

Moving southwards to the United States, a new company
called Gold Fields American Corporation was formed in 1961
as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gold Fields Mining &
Industrial Ltd. Gold Fields American took over the New York
organisation, set up originally in 1911, whose main function
iN recent years had been to provide administration for Gold
Fields’ Tri-State Zinc Inc. and Buell Engineering Co. Inc.,
as well as secretarial services for the Fresnillo Company.

Fresnillo Company was reorganised in 1961, when it trans-
ferred D1 per cent of its diverse Mexican activities to Metalur-
8ica Mexicana Penoles S.A., under the Mexican Government’s
drive to have domestic control of its basic primary resources,
A handsome compensation of $5,500,000 was awarded to
Fresnillo, payable over a period of five years, for the cession
of this holding to Compania Fresnillo $.A., in which it holds
49 per cent to Penoles’ 51 per cent. Fresnillo still retains a
55 per cent interest in Somberette Mining Company, owning
another gold-silver porperty in the State of Zacatecas, Mexico.

With the ‘coming to the end of their profitable lives’ of
Tri-State Zinc’s two mines in Illinois and Virginia, a replace-
ment was sought by a new mine in the New Market area of
Tennessee. This mine Tri-State are bringing into production
in accordance with a joint venture agreement with American
Zinc, Lead & Smelting Co. Under this agreement, Tri-State
will mine and mill at least 20 million tons of zinc-bearing ores
owned by American Zinc near Tri-State’s New Market
property. Profits from the output of a treatment plan, designed
to provide a daily capacity of 3,600 tons, will be distributed
on a basis varying between 50 and 60 per cent to Tri-State
and 50 and 40 per cent to American Zinc, until all capital
has been returned, after which profits will be distributed
equally.

American Zinc’s operations are closely connected with the
mining and reduction of zinc and lead ores in several of the
American States. It also has a 10 per cent interest in Uranium
Reduction Co., and 50 per cent in American-Peru Mining Co.,
among several other affliated and jointly-owned concerns.
Buell Engineering Co., the other beneficiary of Gold Fields
American Corporation, has been assisted to expand its fabri-
cating facilities by taking over the entire common stock of the
Union Boiler & Manufacturing Co.

Consolidated Gold Fields’ interests in the United Kingdom
are now grouped under Gold Fields Industrial Holdings Ltd.,
formerly H. E. Proprietary Ltd., as a wholly-owned subsidiary
of Gold Fields Mining & Industrial Ltd. Its main operations
are carried on through its own subsidiaries, Alumasc Ltd.,
Ambuco Ltd. and Metalion Ltd. Alumasc is a producer of die-
cast aluminium casks, notably for the brewing industry. It has
lately expanded into the production of aluminium high-
ressure bottles for commercial uses. In 1962 Alumasc, in the
words of Consolidated’s chairman, ‘broadened its interests
geographically and industrially’ by the acquisition of an
Australian subsidiary, Lawrenson Alumasc Holdings Ltd.,
and of two United Kingdom subsidiaries, The Non-Ferrous
Die Casting Co. Ltd. and Brass Pressings (London) Ltd.,
already well established in non-ferrous die-casting and brass
pressing.

Two other U.K. organisational instruments radiate from the
London directorate. These are Anglo-French Exploration Co.
Ltd. and Mining & Metallurgical Agency Ltd. Anglo-French
Exploration, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Consolidated Gold
Fields, is an investment and financial business, holding, among

- others, interests in many of the principal gold-mining com-
panies in South Africa. These interests also cover Northern
Rhodesian copper mines, as well as tin-mining companies
operating in the United Kingdom, South Africa and the Far
East. Apex Mines Ltd. and Rooiberg Minerals Development
Co. Ltd. of South Africa, and Anglo-Burma Tin Co. Ltd. are
among its principals. Mining & Metallurgical Agency Ltd.
was formed to look after the distribution of ores and purchase
of supplies, as well as to run a shipping, insurance and general
agency business. Fifty per cent of its capital is held by
Consolidated Gold Fields.

Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd. is the wholly-owned
subsidiary of Consolidated Gold Fields that is responsible for
administering the operations of the group throughout the
whole of South Africa. These are of a monumental size. For
investments in the South Africa gold and platinum mines
remain the major asset of the Consolidated Gold Fields group,
and its principal source of income. At 30 June 1961 gold
mining accounted for 71 per cent of the group’s quoted invest-

_Ments, and the chairman assured shareholders that since the
end of the second world war, Consolidated Gold Fields had
invested capital sums approaching £450 million in the South
African gold mines. Exploration has continued in South Africa
and Rhodesia, and is in close collaboration with West Wit-
watersrand Areas Ltd., a company which Consolidated Gold
Fields floated in 1932. Since then, West Witwatersrand has
itself become an important South African finance mining
company with major holdings in the gold mines of the Far
West Rand and Orange Free State.

West Witwatersrand produced in 1962 gold valued at over
£57 million, which was twice the size of its production of ten
years ago. The Harmony Gold Mining Co. Ltd., in which
West Witwatersrand has a holding of 1,247,564 shares through
its subsidiary Westwits Investment Ltd., also achieved a
record gold output.

Apart from its interests in the Transvaal and Orange Free
State gold and platinum mines, Consolidated Gold Fields has
substantial holdings in South West Africa Co. Ltd., and in
Rhodesia, in Bancroft Mines Ltd., Nchanga Consolidated
Copper Mines Ltd., and Rhodesian Anglo American Ltd., all
falling within the sphere also of Anglo American Corporation.
In Ghana, Consolidated is interested in Konongo Gold Mines
Ltd., which has a concession of approximately twenty square
miles in the Ashanti-Akim district. On an authorised capital
of £675,000, not fully paid up (7,004,175 shares of ls. each
issued out of 13,500,000), a working profit of £110,587 was
achieved in 1960, increased to £130,378 in 1961, despite an
advance in working costs from 86s. 6d. per ton to 88s. 2d. per
ton. In 1962, Konongo Gold Mines Ltd. informed the Ghana
Government that the operation of the Konongo Gold Mine
would become uneconomic after April 1965. The Company
were therefore contemplating ceasing operations just before
that time. In view of the loss of employment that this would
mean, the Government decided to purchase the mine in order
to provide continued employment for the Ghanaian em-
ployees. After protracted negotiations, a purchase price of
£150,000 was paid by the Ghana Government and the mine
is now under the management of the State Gold Mining
Corporation.

Capitalised at £15 million, Consolidated Gold Fields made
consolidated profits before tax of £6,826,000 for the year to
1960/61 with dividends absorbing £1,729,299. The year 1962
proved for Consolidated Gold Fields the most profitable yet
jn its operations, resulting in a consolidated profit before tax of
£7,030,000, while, in the chairman’s own words, ‘another
satisfactory feature of the accounts is that dividends and
interest exceeded £5 million for the first time’.

Consolidated Gold Fields’ income comes largely from the
specialist services which it provides to companies within its
own group and those within its associated groups. Varying
considerably in size, they number over one hundred, and the
total market capitalisation of those quoted on the stock
exchange exceeded £170 million at the end of the company’s
working year of 1962. It is by these means of investment and
management that much larger incomes are built up than from
the actual production of the mining and processing of raw
materials. That is why so many of the more important mining
companies, not alone in Africa but throughout the world,
have coalesced into holding and investment concerns behind
whom and among whom stand the most important figures in
the banking and financial world.

Here we have touched only on the bare bones of the Con-
solidated Gold Fields skeletal structure. The flesh and brawn
which clothe it are set in layers of rich fat that have created a
huge corporation bulge, smugly admired by the owner, but
ominous to the lean, starved African observer.

8. Foreign investment in
South African mining

It has been estimated that over 50 per cent of the foreign
capital invested in Africa has been poured into South Africa.
British investments probably total nearly $2,800 million, and
American investments closer to $840 million. A 1957 U.S.
government survey of American overseas investments shows
the single most profitable area was in the mining and smelting
business of South Africa, whose profits are higher than from
any comparable investment in the United States. The high
profits can be explained largely by the cheapness of African
labour. According to the 1962 Statistical Abstract of the
United States, U.S. miners earn an average of $2.70 an hour,
which is twenty-seven times the amount earned by South
African miners.

Dominant in South Africa’s economy is the Anglo-American
De Beers group, part of the empire of Harry Oppenheimer,
which extends into South West Africa and Zambia, and is
linked with mining companies in many other African states.
The value of the empire has been enhanced by the discovery
that uranium can be produced from the residues and slimes
which surround old gold mines.

Extraction of uranium from gold ores and slimes has
brought South Africa into the world’s leading place as a
producer of uranium. The working of slimes accumulated over
the past sixty years, together with those from current gold
production, is helping to prolong the life of many exhausted
gold mines. In 1956, 8,000,000 Ib. of uranium oxide were
roduced in South Africa, providing exports valued at
£39 million. This leaves out of account the quantities that go
to the Atomic Energy Board of South Africa, with whom
several of the mines have contracts. The profit made from the
production of uranium oxide is running ahead of that derived
from gold extraction. In fact, ‘the working profits derived
from uranium extraction exceeded those derived from gold
extraction on the seventeen producing mines taken together,
and on five of them they actually offset working losses incurred
in the production of the gold’.*

Harmony Gold Mining Co. Ltd. is one of the more important
gold and uranium producing companies within the Anglo
American Consolidated Gold Fields’ maze of interests. Its
authorised capital of £5 million has been paid up to the amount
of £4,500,000. Secretarial services and offices to the company
are provided by Rand Mines Ltd., a company that gives execu-
tive, administrative and technical services to the South African
companies of the Central Mining—Rand Mines group.

Chairman of Harmony is P.H. Anderson, a deputy chairman
of Rand Mines. Other directors in common are Messrs.
R. E. M. Blakeway and N. W. S. Lewin. Chairman of Rand
Mines is C. W. Engelhard, who is also chairman of Rand
American Investments (Pty) Ltd., and patently has a watching
brief for the United States investors who more and more are
infiltrating into primary materials extraction in Africa. All of
Rand American’s 2,371,049 issued shares of £1 each are held
by De Beers Investment Trust Ltd. (now Randsel), a wholly
owned subsidiary of Rand Selection Corporation since the
recent re-juggling of the Rand group. Rand American owns
nearly all the preference shares and a substantial interest in
the issued ordinary shares of Central Mining & Investment
Corporation Ltd., as well as a substantial interest in the issued
ordinary capital of Rand Mines Ltd. The American link con-
firms the tie-up forming the Central Mining—Rand Mines
group.

* South Africa, Monica Cole, pp. 313-15, Methuen, 1961. The quotation
telates to the year 1955.

Consolidated Gold Fields and Anglo American Corporation
interests converge in Harmony, in which both have appreciable
holdings. By the grace of the South African Government,
Harmony was able to acquire undermining and mineral rights
over some 8,000 acres of land, as well as freehold ownership
of farms covering approximately another 10,000 acres. These
holdings being rather more than Harmony could cope with, it
was found profitable to sell the right to mine precious metals
on two portions of its areas on lease until 1967. This right went
to another Anglo American concern, Virginia Orange Free
State Gold Mining Co. Ltd. Harmony’s remuneration for this
friendly gesture to a sister company was a minimum £3 million
payable quarterly free of interest.

Virginia Orange brings us once more into contact with the
American marriage to South African mining, our first example
being Mr C. W. Engelhard, an American Democrat, who, as
president of Engelhard Industries, refiners of precious metals
in the United States, sought after steady supplies to keep his
plants working. He found them in South Africa, where he
linked up with Oppenheimer, and later branched out into
baser metals and other fields of profit. Mr Englehard, following
Mr Oppenheimer’s inspiration, has also found a niche in the
Canadian, Australian and Columbian mining industries, and
distributes his finished goods in Eyrope through companies
established in Paris, Rome and London. Mr Engelhard’s
qualities as well as his services to the extension of American
interests abroad are recognised in his membership of the U.S.
Foreign Policy Association.

With Virginia Orange we are brought near to more con-
siderable American influence than Mr Engelhard is able singly
to produce, by the association of the powerful Kennecott
Copper Corporation with this gold mining and uranium
extracting company. Kennecott had interests in Virginia
Orange which it passed over, together with those it owned in
the Merriespruit (Orange Free State) Gold Mining Co. Ltd.,
to the reorganised concern formed in 1961 to acquire those
interests. [he new company bears the combination title,
Virginia-Merriespruit Investments (Pty) Ltd., and the re-
arrangement will enable it to fulfil an outstanding uranium
contract with the Atomic Energy Board of South Africa.

Mr Engelhard is a member of the Virginia-Merriespruit
board by virtue of the holding directly bought into it by his
Engelhard Industries of Southern Africa Ltd., and his con-
nections with Rand Mines Ltd. and Anglo American Corpora-
tion which together with another two associates, Centramic
(South Africa) Ltd. and Anglo Transvaal Consolidated
Investment Co. Ltd. form the parties to the new company.

Financiers and dealers in mining and other properties in the
Transvaal, Anglo Transvaal has a subsidiary, Anglovaal
Rhodesian Exploration Co. (Pty) Ltd., which operates in
Northern and Southern Rhodesia, its mineral prospects
including coal, copper, chrome and nickel. With capital
authorised at £4,337,500, not fully paid up, Anglo Transvaal
is operating on an unsecured short-term loan of {1 million
from the National Finance Corporation of South Africa, a
private organisation with which Anglo American Corporation’s
friends of the international investment world are closely
associated, including the house of Morgan, which has a sub-
stantial financial interest in Kennecott Copper. Among
Kennecott’s extensive mining engagements in Africa is a
50 per cent investment in Anglovaal Rhodesian.

Primed by Morgan friends, Kennecott knows how to take
care of its manifold concerns. Hence, as consideration for
cession of its interests in the Viginia and Merriespruit mines,
it is to receive an amount of £3,500,000, payable in five annual
instalments. This does not, however, sever Kennecott’s con-
nection with these valuable Oppenheimer-Engelhard pro-
perties. For the American copper corporation will be entitled
to an interest of 20 per cent up to a maximum amount of
£2,500,000 on any of Virginia-Merriespruit’s net surplus that
may accrue after the instalment payments on the cash con-
sideration of £3,500,000 have been fully met. This entitlement,
however, will be forfeited in the event of Kennecott taking up
at a later date from the members of Virginia-Merriespruit
20 per cent of the then issued share capital.

These are the tortuous means by which financial clinches
are held. It is obvious that the way is being kept wide open for
Kennecott’s re-entry into the heart of the company. Meantime
it can still feast at the table.

Kennecott is a foremost copper producer in the United
States, whose shares on the ‘futures’ market are valued by
knowing operators at around $1.48 billions, even though its
present capital of 11,053,051 shares of no nominal or par value
issued out of 12,000,000 authorised, have been given a stated
value of only $74,806,424. The possessor of copper mines,
concentrating mills, smelters, refineries, fabricating works and
railways, it has smelting agreements for much of its ores with
American Smelting & Refining Co., with whom it has two
subsidiaries in common. American Smelting is a producer
itself of copper, as well as of silver, lead, zinc and gold, in the
United States, Mexico, Canada and Peru. Its interests extend
to Australia and Nicaragua, and it has arrangements with Cerro
Corporation, Newmont Mining Corporation and Phelps Dodge
Corporation, all of whom have substantial investments in
South African mining projects, including the Tsumeb Corpora-
tion of South West Africa.

The American chemical industry enters the Kennecott field
of operations through a joint venture with the important
Allied Chemical & Dye Corporation. The Allied-Kennecott
Titanium Corporation is to produce and sell titanium metal,
and has put up a pilot plant. A further break-through has been
made by the acquisition of 25 per cent in Western Phosphates
Inc., 7-3 per cent in the common stock of Molybdenum
Corporation of America, and 50 per cent in Garfield Chemical
& Manufacturing Corporation. There has been a branching
out into mineral exploration in Brazil and Mexico with two
subsidiaries, Kenrand Pesquisas Minerals S.A. (60 per cent
Kennecott owned) and Cia. Kenmex S.A. respectively. Another
subsidiary, Braden Copper Co., works a copper property in
Chile.

Expansion into Canada is by way of Quebec Columbium
Ltd., formed by Kennecott with Molybdenum Corporation of
America to investigate a columbium property near Montreal,
and Quebec Iron & Titanium Corporation, owned two-thirds
by Kennecott and one-third by New Jersey Zinc Co. This
latter company is linked up with the great oil organisation,
Texaco Inc. in a joint enterprise, Texas-Zinc Minerals Cor-
poration, for the construction and operation of a uranium

rocessing mill in Utah. A uranium mine in Utah was bought
in 1956 and the mill began operations in 1957, also treating ores
from other mines. The uranium concentrate produced is being
sold to the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission under contract.
The New Jersey-Kennecott venture in Quebec Iron &
Titanium is going to prove extremely valuable, as titanium is
a metal that does not melt at supersonic speeds, and is accord-
ingly in high demand for use in jet aircraft. Greece also figures
in Kennecott’s sphere of interests, where its 95 per cent owned
Kenbastos Mining Co. Ltd. works asbestos properties. In
West Africa, it has a 76 per cent holding in Tin & Associated
Metals Ltd., operating a columbium and tin property in
Northern Nigeria. Columbium from this mine provides most
of the world’s present production.

Our examination into Harmony Gold Mining Co. Ltd. has
led us a long way round the world and into realms of power
and prodigious wealth. This seems inevitable once we begin
to trace the external interests that intertwine Africa’s exploita-
tion with that of many other parts of the world. Coming back
to Harmony, it is impressive to note that this company, having
a gold reduction plant capable of dealing with 200,000 tons of
ore a month, also boasts a uranium extraction plant whose
capacity is 120,000 tons monthly. This plant began operations
in April 1955. Attached to it is a sulphuric acid plant with a
daily capacity of 120 tons, which started production in
January 1960.

The uranium extraction plant was erected under arrange-
ments made with the Export-Import Bank of Washington,
U.S.A., and the U.K. Ministry of Supply. A loan was obtained
from the Atomic Energy Board of South Africa for the entire
Capital cost of the plant, exclusive of the capacity extension
from 80,000 to 120,000 tons monthly. The company is under
contract with the combined Development Agency, as well as
with the U.K. authority alone, to supply various quantities of
uranium at fixed prices, under arrangements which will allow ’
it, without incurring extra cost, to cover by June 1965 the
capital expenditure on plant.

During the year ended 30 June 1961, Harmony milled a
total of 2,116,000 tons of ore, which yielded 857,794 oz. of
fine gold, providing a working revenue of £ 10,810,496, with a
working profit of £4,090,677; 2,067,100 tons of slimes treated
yielded 974,349 lb. of uranium oxide, giving an estimated
working profit from uranium, pyrites and acid of £2,680,233.

Accounts for the following six months to the end of 1961
showed that 2,285,000 tons of ore milled resulted in a working
revenue from gold of £4,458,177. Treatment of 2,138,300 tons
of slimes produced 953,100 lb. of uranium oxide, giving a
working profit from uranium, pyrites and acid of £2,284,647.
For the working year 1961-62 the dividend paid was 554 per
cent. Net profit for the year 1960-61 was £6,674,739, and
dividends paid accounted for £2,497,500. All this can be
regarded as most satisfactory for shareholders on a fully paid §
up capital of £4,500,000.

Messrs. Engelhard and Oppenheimer must bear a special
regard for their friends in the Export-Import Bank for their
ready aid in this venture, in a country that makes a mockery
of human rights for its non-white inhabitants. Such ease of
assistance, if extended to the less developed new nations of the
continent by an international banking organisation, would
help lessen the gap that the developed countries are forever
deprecating but which, by these stealthy means, they serve to
widen between the ‘have’ and ‘have not’ countries.

9. Anglo American Corporation
Limited

BIGGEST octopus in the Oppenheimer sea of operations is
probably the Anglo American Corporation Ltd. Its invest-
ments are on a threefold scale, and the list of the main ones
convey but the barest idea of their very considerable range.
These are more or less direct participations and do not include
the more intricate holdings held through or in common with
subsidiaries and others in a more far-reaching extension of
interests. Principally in mining, they nevertheless branch out
into processing, transport and communications, landholdings
and estate, forestry and timber, industry, as well as into hydro-
electrical power schemes like that of the Rhodesia Congo
Border Power Corporation.

Gold, uranium, iron, asbestos and coal mines are among
the corporation’s most notable undertakings in South Africa,
forming the solid foundation on which the Oppenheimer
empire stands. Copper mining is its principal occupation in
the Rhodesias, though it exploits also lead, zinc and cadmium,
and has the distinction of being the only producer of coal in
Rhodesia, where it controls the Wankie Colliery. Through
associated companies, its interests spread out into Tanganyika,
Uganda, the Congo, Angola, Mozambique, West Africa, and
€ven into the Sahara and North Africa, as can be seen by this
list of direct investments:

127
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

128

Finance and Investment Companies

 

African & European Investment Co. Ltd.

African Loans & Investment Ltd.

Anglo American Investment Trust Ltd.

Anglo American Rhodesian Development Corporation Ltd.
Central Reserves (Pty) Ltd.

Central Reserves Rhodesia (Pty) Ltd.

Consolidated Mines (Investment) Ltd.

Consolidated Mines Selection Co. Ltd.

Consolidated Mines Selection (Johannesburg) Ltd. '
De Beers Holdings Ltd.

De Beers Investment Trust Ltd.

De Beers Rhodesia Investments Ltd.
Epoch Investments Ltd.

Jameson Mining Holdings (Pty) Ltd.
Lydenburg Estates Ltd.

Orange Free State Investment Ltd.
New Central Witwatersrand Areas Ltd.
New Era Consolidated Ltd. >
Overseas & Rhodesian Investment Co. Ltd.

Rand American Investments (Pty) Ltd.

Rand Selection Corporation Ltd.

Rhodesian Acceptances Ltd.

Rhodesian Anglo American Ltd.

Rhodes Investments Ltd.

South Africa Mines Selection Ltd.

South African Townships, Mining & Finance Corporation Ltd.

Transvaal Vanadium Holdings Ltd.
Vereeniging Estates Ltd.

Western Ultra Deep Levels Ltd.
West Rand Investment Trust Ltd.
South West Africa Co. Ltd.

Diamond Mines

De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. !
Consolidated Diamond Mines of South West Africa Ltd.
New Jagersfontein Mining & Exploration Co. Ltd.
Diamond Abrasive Products Ltd.

Diamond Development Co. of South Africa (Pty) Ltd.
Philmond (Pty) Ltd.

 
 

ANGLO AMERICAN CORPORATION LIMITED

Premier (Transvaal) Diamond Mining Co. Ltd.
Williamson Diamonas Ltd.

Coal Mines

Amalgamated Collieries of South Africa Ltd.
Bleebok Colliery Ltd.

Coronation Collieries Ltd.

Natal Coal Exploration Ltd.

Natal Coal Exploration Co. Ltd.

New Largo Colliery Ltd.

South African Coal Estates (Witbank) Ltd.
Springbok Colliery Ltd.

New Schoongezicht Colliery.

Cornelia Colliery Ltd.

Springfield Collieries Ltd.

Transvaal Coal Corporation Ltd.
Vierfontein Coal Holdings Ltd.
Vierfontein Colliery Ltd.

Vryheid Coronation Ltd.

Wankie Colliery Co. Ltd.

Witbank Coal Holdings Ltd.

Copper Mines

Bancroft Mines Ltd.

Kansanshi Copper Mining Co. Ltd.
Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd.
Rhodesia Copper Refineries Ltd.

Rhokana Corporation Ltd.

Gold Mines

Brakpan Mines Ltd.

Daggafontein Mines Ltd.

East Daggafontein Mines Ltd.

Free State Geduld Mines Ltd.

Jeannett Gold Mines Ltd.

President Brand Gold Mining Co. Ltd.
South African Land & Exploration Co. Ltd.
Spring Mines Ltd.

Vaal Reefs Exploration & Mining Co. Ltd.
Welkom Gold Mining Co. Ltd.

129
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

130

Western Deep Levels Ltd.

Western Holdings Ltd.

Western Reefs Exploration & Development Co. Ltd.
President Steyn Gold Mining Co. Ltd.

Free State Saiplaas Gold Mining Co. Ltd.

Other Mining

Highveld Development Co. Ltd.

Iron Duke Mining Co. Ltd.

King Edward (Cuperiferous) Pyrite.

Monasite & Mineral Ventures Ltd. (rare earths).
Munnik Myburgh Chrysotile Asbestos Ltd.
Rhochrome Ltd.

Rhodesia Broken Hill Development Co. Ltd.
Transvaal Manganese (Pty) Ltd.

Transvaal Vanadium Co. (Pty) Ltd.

Umgababa Minerals Ltd. (IImenite, rutile and zircon).
Vereenigning Brick & Tile Co. Ltd.

Prospecting

Anglo American Prospecting Co. Ltd.

Anglo American Rhodesian Mineral Exploration Ltd.
Border Exploration & Development Co. (Pty) Ltd.
De Beers Prospecting (Rhodesian Areas) Ltd.
Kaffrarian Metal Holdings (Pty) Ltd.

Kalindini Exploration Ltd.

Kasempa Minerals Ltd.

Lunga Exploration Ltd.

Prospecting & Mineral Interests Ltd.

Swaziland Rift Exploration Co. Ltd.

Western Rift Exploration Co. Ltd.

Industrial and Sundry

Anglo American (Rhodesia Services) Ltd.

Anglo Collieries Recruiting Organisation (Pty) Ltd.
Boart & Hard Metal Products (Rhodesia) Ltd.
Boart & Hard Metal Products S.A. Ltd.

Clay Products Ltd.

Easan Electrical (Pty) Ltd.

 

 
 

r

ANGLO AMERICAN CORPORATION LIMITED

Electro Chemical Industries Ltd.

Forest Industries & Veneers Ltd.

Hansens Native Labour Organisation (Pty) Ltd.
Hard Metals Ltd.

Inter-Mine Services O.F.S. (Pty) Ltd.
Lourengo Marques Forwarding Co. Ltd.
Northern Rhodesia Aviation Services Ltd.

Peak Timbers Ltd.

Pearlman Veneers (S.A.) Ltd.

Rhoanglo Mine Services Ltd.

Rhodesia Congo Border Power Corporation Ltd.
Rhodesia Copper Products Ltd.

Rhodesian Steel Developments (Pty) Ltd.
Stone & Allied Industries (O.F.S.) Ltd.
Veneered Plywoods Ltd.

Zinc Products Ltd.

Land and Estate

Anglo American (O.F.S.) Housing Co. Ltd.
Anmercosa Land & Estates Ltd.

Cecilia Park (Pty) Ltd.

Falcon Investments Ltd.

Orange Free State Land & Estate Co. (Pty) Ltd.
Prestin (Pty) Ltd.

Welkom Township Co.

It is interesting to note among the companies two that are
engaged in the enlistment of ‘native labour’, namely, Anglo
Collieries Recruiting Organisation (Pty) Ltd. and Hansens
Native Labour Organisation (Pty) Ltd. Recruiting labour for
the South African mines has always been an absorbing
problem in connection with which there long ago grew up an
efficient organisation for importing workers not only from the
reserves of South Africa itself, but also from the protectorates,
the Rhodesias and Nyasaland. There are long-standing arrange-
ments with the authorities of the Portuguese colonies, particu-
larly Mozambique, for the recruitment of African labour for
work in the mines of South Africa.

Enforcement of apartheid through the establishment of
Bantustans, such as that recently gone through in the Transkei,
will force the chiefs, under inducement, to supply increasing
numbers of local men for the mines. There is now a plan to
stop the employment of workers from Zambia, Rhodesia and
Malawi, and even from the protectorates. It may well be
thought that these people will be infected with the ‘disease’ of
nationalism and hence add fuel to the fire of unrest that has
been lit in South Africa itself. It is significant that Mozambique
Africans are still to be allowed the privilege of enriching South
Africa’s mine owners by their toil, not least among them Anglo
American Corporation.

This company was incorporated in 1917 to draw together a
number of mining, investment and industrial companies
already controlled by Mr Harry Oppenheimer, and to bring
them into tighter organisation with such other interests as
Mr C. W. Engelhard, chairman of Rand Mines, Kennecott
Copper Corporation, and other associates. As the guardian of
these interests, Anglo American acts as technical manager
and secretary to an extensive number of mining and in-
vestment companies falling within its wide perimeter. In
its executive, administrative and secretarial capacities, it also
arranges the financial life of the many enterprises coming
under its care.

The list given indicates only the barest bones of Anglo
American’s multifarious interests, and if we were to examine
them in detail we should find ourselves reaching into a most
tangled complex of arteries and sinews. Many of the under-
takings are not only important in themselves but have involve-
ments which weave together the mining, industrial and financial
world of Africa with that of the rest of the world. Such organ-
isations as the Rand Selection Corporation, Union Corporation,
Rhokana Corporation Ltd., and certain others, participate in a
self-perpetuating and exclusive ensemble. Inter-action and
inter-penetration of interests is a predominant feature
emphasising the monopolistic nature of the African mining
industry, whose leaders are the powerful arbiters of the
continent’s industrial growth, especially south of the Sahara. It
is not difficult to understand how, from this position, they and
their European and American associates and financial backers
wield a preponderant influence upon the policies of their
governments in relation to the African scene.

A look, for instance, at Rand Selection Corporation Ltd.
brings us at once upon one of the principal arms of Anglo
American Corporation in the working of its vast empire. Rand
immediately brings to mind the vision of fevered diamond and
gold rushes that followed in the wake of the young Cecil
Rhodes and his brother adventurers in the late eighteen-
seventies. Rhodes’ quarrel with the Boers was over the fight
to penetrate the interior to get at the gold of the Witwatersrand.
His political leadership was assumed to make himself king of
the mining wealth that had been discovered. It was, according
to a committee set up in the Cape to examine Rhodes’ part in
the famous Jameson raid, ‘in his capacity as controller of the
three great joint-stock companies, the British South Africa
Company, the De Beers Consolidated Mines, and the Gold
Fields of South Africa, he directed and controlled the com-
bination which rendered such a proceeding as the Jameson
raid possible’.

The Jameson Raid finished Rhodes politically in South
Africa. It was then he turned to what is now Rhodesia, where
he made the British South Africa Company the power in the
land that it has been ever since. Nor has the control of political
affairs by all the great mining combines abated in any way since
then. Rather has it intensified until they are the powers which
control and direct affairs, not in Africa alone, but by their
integration with other formidable combinations in Europe and
America, they exercise great influence in these continents also
and hence internationally.

De Beers and Gold Fields remain. The intervening years
have, naturally, seen an extension of the opening up of mines
and their exploitation, accompanied by a constant adaptation
of their financial arrangements. Gold Fields heads a vast
Organisation of its own. De Beers has come within the peri-
phery of Rand Selection Corporation but still controls within
Its own group of companies the output and distribution of
most of the world’s diamonds.

In its own right, Rand Selection owns around 14,890 acres
of freehold property in some of the richest mining areas of J
South Africa. A number of townships have been laid out by
the company, in which it has leasehold rights of a high value.
Certain of its rights are secured by a 92 per cent interest in
South African Townships, Mining & Finance Corporation
Ltd. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, African Gold & Base
Metals Holdings Ltd., Cecilia Park (Pty) Ltd. and Dewhurst
Farms Ltd.

Rand Selection is, however, a subsidiary of Anglo American,
under whose direction its scope was enlarged at the close of
1960 to enable it to participate in any new business undertaken
by Anglo American up to 1 October 1970 on an increased
percentage basis. The enlargement of Rand Selection was
accomplished by the contributing of shares, loans and cash to
De Beers Investment Trust by Anglo American, subsidiaries
of British South Africa Co., Central Mining & Investment
Corporation Ltd. De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and
Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Co. Ltd., who have
been joined by the American-controlled South African com-
pany, Engelhard Hanovia Inc., and International Nickel Co.
of Canada Ltd. controlled by the American Rockefeller-
Morgan groups. Rand Selection then acquired all the issued
capital of De Beers Investment Trust in return for the issue of
shares of its own to the Investment Trust’s shareholders.

Under the arrangement, De Beers Investment has become a
wholly owned subsidiary of Rand Selection. Yet at the same
time by the acquisition of its holdings in Rand Selection, De
Beers is now the majority holder of Rand’s 33,085,365 shares
issued and fully paid up of the 35 million authorised to com-
prise its capital of £8,270,000. It is perfectly obvious that the
loans and cash advanced to De Beers by the above-listed
companies were in order to enable it to facilitate its own and
Rand’s enlargement. !

As a result of the 1962 implementation of the agreed re-
arrangement, De Beers Investment is now known as Randsel
Investments Ltd. Its three wholly owned subsidiaries, Rand
American Investments (Pty) Ltd., Rhodes Investments Ltd.
and Jameson Mining Holdings (Pty) Ltd., are now consolidated
within the Rand Selection organisation. The two holding com-
panies, Rand Selection and Randsel, shared also in 1962 in
the enlargement of another Anglo American creation, Con-
solidated Mines Selection Co. Ltd., registered in the United
Kingdom in 1897, whose interests cover the major mining
activities of Southern Africa.

The assets of Consolidated Mines were jerked up to
£15 million by the acquisition from companies within the
Anglo American Sphere of holdings worth over £10,500,000
in the British South Africa Co., Central Mining & Investment
Corporation Ltd., Johannesburg Consolidated Investment
Corporation Ltd. and Selection Trust Ltd., as well as by
smaller holdings in Bay Hall Trust Ltd. and Rhodesian Anglo
American Ltd. In return for ceding their shares, the partici-
pating companies have acquired shares in Consolidated Mines
Selection Co. Ltd.

At the same time, Rand Selection took up, in association
with Anglo American, Consolidated Mines Selection and
affiliated companies, an option on the purchase of 400,000
shares in Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting Co. Ltd., one of
the three leading copper-gold mining companies of Canada,
controlled by United States finance. Exercise of this option
was made possible by loans raised in America, probably from
the same interests behind Hudson Bay Mining.

Rand Selection’s operations also coincide with those of
Anglo American in the very important Swaziland Iron Ore
Development Co. Ltd., which has concluded contracts with
two major Japanese steel producers, Yawata Iron & Steel Co.
Ltd. and Fuji Iron & Steel Co. Ltd., as well as with General
Ore International Corporation, for the sale to them of
12 million tons of iron ore over a period of approximately ten
years.

_ Anglo American has enabled Rand Selection to participate
in the purchase from British Coated Board & Paper Mills Ltd.,
a United Kingdom firm, of a large holding in South African
Board Mills Ltd. ‘This’, stated Mr H. F. Oppenheimer, in his
teport to the 71st annual general meeting of Rand Selection
Corporation Ltd., in Johannesburg, on 26 February 1963, ‘is
one of the leading growth companies in South Africa, and is
managed by Stafford Mayer & Co., with whom the Anglo
American Corporation has long been associated in the coal
industry’.

Contractual arrangements with Anglo American have
secured Rand Selection participation in a number of property
developments in central Johannesburg. The two have also gone
hand in hand in Anglo American’s widespread prospecting
activities and in certain development projects. Among them
are explorations into the feasibility of the bushveld igneous
complex of South Africa.

Here, indeed, in Anglo American, is the most ramified
industrial and financial structure in Africa, powerful and com-
manding, the organisation that governs the fate of many
millions on this continent and stretches out its influence over-
seas. Like all monopolies, Anglo American is never content
with the existing boundaries of its empire, but is ever seeking
extensions, partly because it cannot afford to be overtaken.
Hence it is continually conducting a comprehensive prospect-
ing programme in many parts of Africa and elsewhere, in
order to find untapped sources of mineral wealth that can be
profitably exploited.

10. The diamond groups

THE diamond industry of South Africa brought in a revenue of
£93 million in 1962. Two-thirds of this was from gem
diamonds, whose carat price was recently raised by the indus-
try’s controllers. Of such importance is the diamond industry to
South Africa that there is no duty on the export of rough
diamonds.

Diamonds are a major concern of Mr Harry Oppenheimer,
and it is through De Beers and the Diamond Corporation, with
their associated companies and alliances that the operations of
his Anglo American Corporation stretch out from South Africa
into South-West Africa, Angola, Congo, East and West Africa,
to control until recently the production and sale of pretty well
85 per cent of the world’s diamonds. Even the distribution of
the Soviet Union’s quite important production has been added,
by the arrangement to dispose of ‘Red’ diamonds through
De Beers’ selling organisation.

The De Beers’ group of companies, as we have seen, is
controlled by Rand Selection Corporation Ltd. Tightly inter-
woven, it interlocks with the gem companies of Angola and
Mozambique and the dominating complex that spreads across
the Rhodesias and Congo. Rand Selection now dominates the
administration of the group by reason of its recent acquisition
of the total holdings of De Beers Investment Trust Ltd., now
known as Randsel Investments Ltd.

Chief operating company is De Beers Consolidated Mines
Ltd., and still on its board is a member of the family of Solly
Joel, the East End Londoner with whom Rhodes adventured
into diamonds along with Alfred Beit. Consolidation of the
De Beers, Kimberley and Griqualand West Mines of South-
West Africa was the original purpose of the company. A
considerable number of allied and even different interests have
since been added. Besides the mines in South Africa, De Beers
operates open-cast workings along the southern coast and in
Namaqualand, South-West Africa. A 50 per cent interest is
held in the Williamson Mine in Tanganyika; the other holder
is the Tanganyika Government.

Among its subsidiary companies, De Beers Consolidated
includes Premier (Transvaal) Diamond Mining Co. Ltd.,
Consolidated Mines of South-West Africa Ltd., Diamond
Corporation Ltd. and De Beers Industrial Corporation Ltd.
Directly and indirectly, it holds something like 40 per cent of
the capital of Diamond Purchasing & Trading Co. Ltd. and
Diamond Trading Co. Ltd., and 31-5 per cent of Industrial
Distributors (1946) Ltd. All these purchasing and distributing
companies are main avenues through which the gem and
industrial diamond production of the world’s principal pro-
ducers are distributed. De Beers Industrial has also interests in
diamond production by its control of Griqualand West Diamond
Mining Co., Dutoitspan Mine Ltd., New Jagersfontein Mining
& Exploration Co. Ltd. and Consolidated Co. Bultfontein
Mine Ltd.

What seems at first glance to be a rather curious interest for a
company engaged in the diamond industry is De Beer Con-
solidated’s 50 per cent holding of the issued share capital of
African Explosives & Chemical Industries Ltd. On closer
examination it will not appear so odd. The company thought
it expedient and profitable to have its own avenue for
purchasing explosives used in opening up working areas
on its own mines and those of associated companies. That
was the original aim, but once in the explosive business it was
a short road to their manufacture and expansion into serious
production of chemicals, especially those allied to explosives
manufacture.

The present-day operations of African Explosives is by no
means so limited, nor is there anything innocent about them or
the company’s composition. Through De Beers Industrial
Corporation it is jointly owned by De Beers’ principal, Anglo
American Corporation, and the South African branch of
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. I.C.I.’s ramifications and
its control of a number of chemicals, synthetics and manu-
facturing processes make it one of the most powerful monopolies
in the world. It long ago reached the stage of cartelisation with
other foremost chemicals and armaments organisations. Its
cartel arrangements with the major chemical and _ plastics
material company in the world, the I.E. du Pont de Nemours
Corporation, link it with the modern military equipment
industry that seems to issue inevitably from chemicals manu-
facture.

Explosives laid the foundation of the du Pont rise to power.
‘Their first big order was to supply Napoleon in his vain
attempt to crush Toussaint L’Ouverture and the people of
Santo Domingo, and the next was for the war of the United
States—against the so-called ‘Barbary Pirates’.* The following
quotation is from Cartels in Action quoted by Victor Perlo in
The Empire of High Finance, page 195:

“This established the role of du Pont, which has continued
down to the present day, when it dominates the greatest and
most profitable single corporation in the world, General
Motors.

Du Pont’s association with I.C.I. goes back about forty
years. It was in 1921 that more than half of the General
Motors’ shares sold by the House of Morgan were bought by
Explosives Trade Ltd., a British subsidiary of the Nobel
industries, with which I.C.I. was connected. Explosives were
among I.C.1I.’s earliest operations, and its interests in Nobel’s
concerns in this and other fields were subsequently absorbed
into the heart of the I.C.I. empire.

Ever since that early coming together the alliance between
du Pont and I.C.I. has grown more complex. Both of them

* The Empire of High Finance, Victor Perlo, p. 190.

had effective patent and processing rights with the great
German chemical combine, I. G. Farben, and they divided
the world between them. Both du Pont and I.C.I. continued
to respect their arrangements with I. G. Farben during the
war. Du Pont and I.C.I. have abandoned all pretence of
business rivalry in numerous major foreign markets, includ-
ing Canada, Argentina and Brazil. There they do business as
a single, unified concern through jointly owned local com-
panies .. . they have succeeded in cartelising these tributary
chemical markets, thanks to their combined power and
prestige.’

If we see I.C.I. in association with Oppenheimer companies
in South Africa, this should not astonish us. Monopolies are
constantly drawing together, aligned by common industrial and
financial interests in a given field and at a given time. The
I.C.I.-Oppenheimer combination is not restricted to African
Explosives but repeats itself in association with other Oppen-
heimer offshoots and groups. British blessing is given to the
enterprise through the secondment on contract to the company
of an expert from the British nuclear arms establishment.
Moreover, the military equipment produced at its factories is
based on the specifications of the British army, navy and air
forces.

Important though African Explosives is to the Oppenheimer
combine and South Africa’s military designs in Africa, it owes
its existence to the diamond mining in which it was originally
conceived. It is only one of the De Beers Consolidated progeny.
There are several others, among them the investment company,
De Beers Holding Ltd., of which it controls 84-5 per cent.
On the death of J. T. Williamson, De Beers Holding contrived
to secure an option on the whole of 1,200 shares constitut-
ing the capital of his mine in Tanganyika. A deal was fixed
at £4,139,996, with De Beers responsible for estate duty
and interest on Williamson’s shares. Satisfaction of these items
was made by cession of 320 shares of Williamson Diamonds
Ltd. to the Tanganyika Government, which subsequently
bought up a further 280. The price of £1,317,272 agreed upon
for these was met, together with six per cent total interest, out
of dividends received by the Government on its total holding
of 600 shares.

Consolidated Diamond Mines of South-West Africa Ltd., in
which De Beers Consolidated has a majority holding, has a
concession covering large areas of alluvial diamond deposits in
South-West Africa, valid until the close of the year 2010. This
was extended by the South-West Administration from a previ-
ous expiry date of 1972. A most valuable item in the De Beers’
inventory of profits is the ‘De Pass’ royalty owned by the
South-West Financial Corporation Ltd., a full subsidiary of
Consolidated Diamond Mines. This royalty gives its owner
eight per cent of the gross proceeds from the sale of diamonds
produced in the Pomona area of South-West Africa, in which
South-West Finance possesses landed property and other
mineral rights and royalties.

Participation in the diamond distributive trade comes to
Consolidated Diamond Mines through the following holdings:

Diamond Corporation Ltd.—5,996,903 shares.

Diamond Trading Co. Ltd.—80,000 shares.

Diamond Purchasing & Trading Co. Ltd.—200,000 shares.
Industrial Distributors (1946) Ltd.—150,000 shares.

De Beers Holdings Ltd.—1,150,000 shares.

Its own production of diamonds has gone up from 895,744
carats in 1958 to 933,937 in 1960. Taken together with its
earnings by way of royalties and investments in the diamond
trade, it is small wonder that it has over the past fifteen years
been able to declare the following impressive dividends:

1946-1949: 40% plus 10% bonus each year.
1950: 40% plus 20%.
1951: 125%.
1952-1958: 150°, each year.
1959: 200%.
1960: 200%.

The company’s fully paid-up and authorised capital stands at
£5,240,000. Its net consolidated profit in 1960 was £10,734,468,
after providing {4,622,731 for taxation. Dividends absorbed
£9,667,437, the major beneficiary being De Beers Consolidated.
The estimated profit for 1961 was £12,848,000, after providing
£5,410,000 for taxation and £168,000 for dividends on prefer-
ence shares. The figure for ordinary dividend payments is not
included, but it is likely to be higher than for the previous year.

Diamond Mining & Utility Co. (S.W.A.) Ltd. is associated
with De Beers Consolidated by reason of a cession to the latter
company of a large portion of a diamond area in South-West
Africa, in exchange for a 20 per cent interest in the net profit on |
diamonds recovered. The company has 180,000 shares in
Diamond Dredging & Mining Co. (S.W.A.) Ltd. To satisfy
this purchase, Diamond Mining & Utility issued at par another
540,000 shares in July 1960, the authorised capital then being
increased from £300,000 to £500,000. Its other interests are
114,400 shares in Industrial Diamonds of South Africa (1945)
Ltd., which ceased operations in the spring of 1960, but retains
148,200 shares in Diamond Mining & Utility, as well as 197,900
shares in Lorelei Copper Mines Ltd., in which Diamond
Mining & Utility also holds 200,000 shares. All in all, this
demonstrates what might be described as a tight but cosy
combination.

The most interesting hub of the whirling diamond wheel is
the Diamond Corporation, whose £22 million capital is owned
mainly by De Beers Consolidated Mines, Diamond Mines of
South-West Africa and the ever-present Anglo American
Corporation. The Diamond Corporation purchases, on periodi-
cal contract, the diamond production of the world’s most
important producers, usually on a specific quota basis. These
diamonds are then marketed through the Central Selling
Organisation, together with the output of the De Beers’ group
mines and those from the diggings owned and run by the South
African Government, which is in the mining business on State
account.

Where do the other diamond trading companies come in?
Diamond Trading Company Ltd. receives and sells to the
market diamonds of gem or near gem value. Industrial Dis-
tributors (Sales) Ltd. have a corner on drilling material and
boart for the mines, which they sell to the market.

Close associates of De Beers also have interests in these
tributary companies of the group. Société Miniere du Beceka
S.A., a company within the dragnet of the Société Générale de
Belgique, has holdings in Industrial Distributors (1946) Ltd.,
Diamond Trading Co. Ltd., Diamond Purchasing & Trading
Co. Ltd., Diamond Development Co. Ltd. and in another of
the Société Générale’s wards of the diamond world, Société
Diamant Boart. Industrial Distributors, also within Sociéte
Générale’s direct investment portfolio, increased its 1961 divi-
dend by about 20 per cent over those of previous years.
Beceka’s association with the Congo is continued through the
Société d’Elevage et de Culture au Congo (S.E.C.) and Cie
Maritime Belge (C.M.B.).

Operating deposits on the Lubilash river in the Congo, which
produce mainly industrial diamonds and crushing boart,
Beceka has a subsidiary, Société Beceka-Manganese, working
manganese deposits near a Congolese railway junction. At the
beginning of 1962 Beceka-Manganese established a 500 million
franc subsidiary, Société Miniére de Kisenga, in which it is the
chief shareholder. Kisenga has received certain concessionary
and exploitation rights from Beceka-Manganese, which also
participated in October 1962 in the creation of the Société
Européenne des Derives du Manganese—SEDEMA. The main
parties to the formation of Sedema are associates of the Société
d’Entreprise et d’Ivestissements du Beceka—SIBEKA~—-and
the Manganese Chemicals Corporation of U.S.A.

From the report of the Société Générale for 1962, a directing
hand behind all this segmentation, it emerges that an extraordi-
nary meeting of Beceka on 21 March 1962 agreed that Beceka
should renounce in favour of a new company, Société Miniere
de Bakwanga, all its mining rights in the Congo (mainly in the
Bakwanga region), and ‘should become the Société d’Entreprise
et d’Investissements du Beceka, to be known by its abbreviated
form, Sibeka. The purpose of Sibeka was re-formed to cover
the investigation, promoting and financing, by whatever means,
in Belgium as well as in the Congo, and other foreign countries,
of all kinds of enterprises, whether in mining, industry,
Commerce, agriculture or transport, especially those having
connections with mineral substances of all kinds, as well as with
their derivatives and substitutes.

Within the framework of this new objective, the former
participations were increased and new participations were taken
up or were in course of examination, in particular certain ones
having to do with the production of artificial diamonds. The
principal activity of Sibeka, however, is to be its important
participation in Société Miniére de Bakwanga, known as Miba.
Miba’s production in 1961, its first year of working, was nearly
15 million carats of diamonds, which the chairman of Société
Générale considered should be its normal ‘rhythm’, having
regard to the selling market.

Sibeka has been busy in South Kasai, where other invest-
ments have been placed, including the modernisation of a
150 km. road from Bakwanga to the station at Mwene-Ditu.
Société Générale’s participation in Sibeka stands at 525,000
shares of no par value, and it has assisted Beceka- Manganese to
place 10 million francs out of the 11 million francs it has been
allotted in the 81 million franc capital of Sedema. Sibeka has
taken up another 10 million francs. The object of Sedema is the
manufacture of manganese composites and manganese metals
for the European market.

It is not long before any endeavour to trace the companies
engaged in a particular field of mining leads into associations
connecting with other sectors of raw materials production.
Thus our examination of the De Beers’ diamond enterprises has
taken us into the even vaster world of Société Générale’s
interests, which we shall meet again more than once in the
course of our journeyings through the tangled maze of inter-
national control of Africa’s basic riches. It is also significant
that in almost every corner we find lurking some coupling with
American major industrial concerns. In the present case,
Manganese Chemicals Corporation comes immediately and
directly into the picture.

Looking further into African diamond production, we find
another Société Générale off-shoot operating in the Congo.
Société Internationale Forestiére et Miniére du Congo, known
briefly as Forminiére, concerns itself with mining, commercial,
industrial and agricultural pursuits, chiefly in Kasai. Its main
preoccupation is diamond mining.

Forminiére is one of King Leopold’s original main con-
cessions in the Congo. He formed the company in 1906 with the
help of, among others, two American businessmen, Thomas F.
Fortune and Daniel Guggenheim, the last of whom built up a
fortune from mining in South America. Today Forminiére is
part of the vast complex dominated by Société Générale,
Tanganyika Concessions and its child, Union Miniére du Haut
Katanga, which has the Congo’s economic life in the palm of its
hand, and is now greedily extended to Angola and Mozambique.
Through its subsidiary, Société Internationale Commerciale et
Financiére de la Forminiére—INTERFOR—it has sister
interests with Beceka in a number of agricultural companies
working plantations in the Congo on a grand scale.

Other holdings held by Forminiére are in mining companies
such as Société de Recherches et d’Exploitation des Bauxites du
Congo—BAUXICONGO-—featured also in Union Miniere’s
lengthy list of more important interests. Oil is also included in
the Société Générale’s empire through Société de Recherches
et d’Exploitations des Petrolese—SOCOREP. This is among
Forminiére’s investments.

The Diamond Corporation acts as the rallying centre for the
merchandise offered for sale by all the large producers. In its
role as the central buying organisation for the international
procurers of diamonds, it is not surprising that it should have
a share in some of the most important producing companies
outside the South African group. Messrs H. F. Oppenheimer
and H. J. Joel of its own directorate are seated on the board of
the Angola Diamond Co. (Companhia de Diamantes de Angola),
another two members of which, Messrs Albert E. Thiele and
A. A. Ryan, adorn the Forminiére board. Mr Thiele has
important connections with certain powerful American groups.
He began his career in 1909 with the Guggenheim brothers, one
of whom was so helpful to Leopold II. Thence he graduated to
the chairmanship of the Pacific Tin Consolidated Corporation
and to directorates in the Kennecott Copper Corporation and
its subsidiary, Braden Copper Co. Oil and nitrates are also Mr
Thiele’s business. Maracaibo Oil and Barber Oil are numbered
among his directorships, as are Chilean Nitrates Sales Corpora-
tion, and the chairmanship of the Feldspar Corporation. As a
director of Angola Diamond and Forminiere, he has most
certainly not innocently strayed from his basic moorings,
anchored in Guggenheim, Kennecott Copper, oil, tin and
nitrates, in which the Morgans have their helping hand. The
Morgan Guaranty Trust is one of the main arteries from which
flows finance for the Oppenheimer combines. Morgan is also in
association with the Banque Belge, the leading banking string
in the Société Générale structure, and the biggest bank in
Belgium. Represented on the Angola Diamond board is another
Angola concern, Companhia de Pesquisas Mineiras de Angola.

Angola Diamonds has monopoly rights permitting it to work
for diamonds over almost 390,000 square miles of Angola, an
area almost four times the size of Ghana or Great Britain.
Forty-three mines are in operation, three new ones having been
opened to replace three whose reserves were running out.
Prospecting is going on for further deposits, nineteen groups
being at work. Direct interest in the company, registered in
Portugal, is held by the Angola Government, the on-the-spot
administrative arm of the Portuguese Government. It holds
200,000 shares, slightly in excess of the 198,800 held by the
Société Générale. About half the African workers for the
company are forced labourers rounded up by the authorities
and receiving a monthly wage of around seventy escudos,
equivalent to about sixteen shillings. The very handsome profits
of the company are divided equally between the Province of
Angola and the shareholders after six per cent has been allo-
cated to the managing bodies.

Shareholders’ profit at the end of trading, 1960, was
137,000,931 escudos, after the same amount had been reserved
for the Angola Province and 15,341,649 escudos for legal
reserve. Total profits, in fact, amounted to 289,343,511 escudos,
of which 114,800,000 escudos had come from profits held in
reserve. Interim and final dividends absorbed a sum for the
year 1960 of 136,670,000 escudos.

The company pays no import duties on plant or material and
no duties on diamonds exported. It also enjoys a loan from the
Angola Government of 100 million escudos, in return for the
free issue of 100,000 shares of 170 escudos each to the Province
of Angola in 1955. The unheard-of uneconomic rate of interest
on this loan is one per cent, repayments to be completed in
1971. Angola Diamond Co. holds 16-266 per cent of the issued
capital of Sociedade Portuguesa de Lapidacao de Diamantes.

Diamond Corporation has contractual arrangements for the
purchase of Angola Diamond’s output, which has recently been
running at over a million carats and is estimated to give even
higher yields, since mechanical excavators and washing plant
have been installed, following the proof of extensive alluvial
deposits. Gem diamonds represent 65 per cent of the output.

Diamond Corporation has broken into the Ivory Coast, with
the formation of a local subsidiary to purchase diamonds on the
open market of that country. How open the market will be is
anybody’s guess. Some of the other newly independent African
‘countries are striving to break away from Diamond Corporation
domination. Ghana has set up its own diamond market in
Accra, and all sellers, including Consolidated African Selection
Trust Ltd. (CAST), working a 68 square mile concession in the
Akim Abuakwa district, must sell through it. Sierra Leone
Selection Trust Ltd. is CAST’S subsidiary operating in Sierra
Leone.

Incredible as it may sound, Sierra Leone Selection once held
exclusive diamond mining rights over practically the whole of
the country. In 1955, following protestations from the people,
especially in the rich diamond region of Konor, the extent of
its concession area was reduced to some 209 square miles, then
the extent of the company’s existing working. The curtailment
of rights, however, was more apparent than real. The con-
cessionary rights are for thirty years, but restricted rights were
granted over a further 250 square miles, of which a hundred
have since been taken up. The company is also allowed
to prospect for deep deposits of diamonds anywhere in
Sierra Leone, for a period of not less than ten years; and to
mine them.

That the agreement was a sham is proved by the undertaking
given by the then Colonial Government not to grant before
1975 to any applicants other than Sierra Leonians, or companies
in which the beneficial interest or greater part of it is held by
Sierra Leonians, any diamond prospecting licences or leases
without first offering such licences or leases to Sierra Leone
Selection Trust. Though this virtually gives a free hand to the
company, the Government nevertheless made it a payment of
£1,500,000 to compensate for supposedly lost opportunities.
All the six million shares issued out of the 6,400,000 authorised
to make up the capital of £1,600,000 are held by CAST. What
profits the company makes are not publicly known, since
accounts are issued only to shareholders.

The chairman of both CAST and Sierra Leone Selection is
Mr A. Chester Beatty, who has as colleagues on both boards
Messrs E. C. Wharton-Tigar, T. H. Bradford and P. J. Oppen-
heimer. Mr P. J. Oppenheimer also sits on the board of the
Diamond Corporation, alongside Mr W. A. Chapple, who is
another colleague on the CAST board. Both these gentlemen
sit together on the London Committee of De Beers Consoli-
dated Mines, Mr P. J. Oppenheimer also occupying a seat on
the Johannesburg Committee, on which he is associated with
Major-General I. P. de Villiers, C.B., and Mr A. Wilson, the
last-named two being also joined together on the directorate of
Consolidated Diamond Mines of South West Africa Ltd.

Mr Thomas Horat Bradford represents Selection Trust Ltd.,
of which he is managing director, on its main associated
companies in America, the Rhodesias, Canada and Venezuela.
Mr Beatty keeps company with Mr Bradford on several of these
boards. Mr Chapple’s connection with the diamond world is on
a decidedly high level, if we may judge from his directorship of
the Banque Diamantaire Anversoise S.A. Antwerp, which is
still the world’s major diamond-cutting centre, employing over
13,000 people in this industry. The Antwerp Diamond Bank
occupies an important strategic position. Something like 40,000
to 50,000 carats are cut in Antwerp every week, the bulk of the
rough stones coming from the Diamond Trading Company, at
the London end of the De Beers’ Central Selling Organisation.
But Antwerp searches other sources for its diamond supplies
and in 1961 got as much as 30 per cent of its total weight in
carats elsewhere.

It is only too obvious that Mr A. Chester Beatty moves
among the exalted ranks of the diamond world, especially that
preponderant sector of it dominated by the De Beers’ group
and pivoted around the Diamond Corporation and its Selling
Organisation. It is therefore difficult to understand the play
that Mr Beatty made in connection with the Sierra Leone
Government Bill, passed towards the end of 1961, obliging all
producers of diamonds in Sierra Leone to sell through the
Government Diamond Office.

Mr Beatty, as chairman of Selection Trust Ltd., as well as of
CAST and Sierra Leone Selection, its subsidiary, asserted that
the expired contract that CAST had with the Diamond
Corporation had not been renewed because of the excessive
commission of 12 per cent demanded by it. CAST had offered
four per cent, which had been rejected. A contract was therefore
made with Harry Winston, Inc., of New York, owners and
cutters of the famed Jonker diamond, who were said to be
looking for a direct source of supply which would sidestep the
Diamond Corporation. In view of the interconnection between
Selection Trust and the De Beers’ companies, including the
Diamond Corporation, through interdependent shareholdings
as well as directorial interweaving, it is strange to witness one of
the most prominent links in the chain, Mr A. Chester Beatty,
protesting his anxiety to protect Sierra Leone’s interests against
the Corporation, of which he is very much a part.

The protest from Mr Beatty was that if Sierra Leone
Selection were obliged to submit its production to the Govern-
ment’s Diamond Office this would ultimately go to the
Diamond Corporation, which was the Diamond Office’s end
purchaser, precisely what he was fighting against. Moreover,
this would mean severing the contract with Winston, for which
breach compensation would have to be made. Mr Beatty
pointed out that his solicitude for Sierra Leone’s welfare had
caused him to secure a revaluation of the Diamond Corporation
contract in 1957, so that an additional £2,700,000 had been
received in its last three years of operation.

There is a curious twist here, for Mr Beatty asserts that
£500,000 more in revenue would be received by the Sierra
Leone Government under the Winston contract than under one
concluded with Diamond Corporation. Four pertinent ques-
tions arise from this. What increased percentage of revenue was
represented by the additional £2,700,000 Mr Beatty said was
obtained from the Diamond Corporation on the last three years
of the expired contract? How much of this came into the hands
of the Sierra Leone Government, and what increased per-
centage of revenue did it represent for the Government? How
is it that Mr Beatty could not obtain similarly advantageous
terms from a new contract with Diamond Corporation?
Is the eight per cent better price from Winston accurately
reflected in the estimate of some £500,000 additional revenue
for the Government that would accrue from a contract with
Winston?

But is not all this just a facade aimed at maintaining the
fiction that Selection Trust and Diamond Corporation are
unrelated entities, a fiction retailed even by a press one would
assume knows better? For we have the Freetown correspondent
of West Africa declaring in that journal’s issue of 27 January
1962 that ‘the two European giants in the (diamond) industry—
Diamond Corporation and Selection Trust—were clearly at
loggerheads’. The heart of the matter really lies in Mr Beatty’s
complaint that the Sierra Leone Government’s regulation inter-
feres with his company’s freedom, expressly laid down by the
former Colonial Government in their concession agreement, to
sell as they think fit. Mr Beatty, like the monopolistic interests
he represents so efficiently on many boards, does not wish to
recognise the winds of change that have come with African
independence, giving the new nations the opportunity to order
their economies in the way they consider more beneficial for
their own good.

Intrusion into the diamond field has been made lately by a
Texan who has more usually appeared wherever oil was bub-
bling. Mr Sam Collins has put his hands to gathering diamonds
from the sea bed of the Chameis Reef on the South-West
African coast, reported to contain a minimum reserve of 14
million carats. Mr Collins scouted round for additional capital
for his Sea Diamonds Company, holding the operating
company, Marine Diamonds. It was reported that Mr Oppen-
heimer, after watching his activities with some concern, decided
to collaborate with Mr Collins. It would appear that General
Mining & Finance Corporation and Anglo Transvaal Consoli-
dated, which we have already met as part of the Anglo
American complex, had engaged themselves in the venture.
They were to make available additional funds up to £500,000
to equalise with a like amount to be put up by Mr Collins and
the companies controlled by him. General Mining has an
exchange of shares with Anglo American, and De Beers Con-
solidated Mines is among its portfolio of investments, as is also
National Finance Corporation of South Africa, which is so
helpful to a number of Oppenheimer companies in the matter
of loans.

De Beers apparently had an option on 25 per cent of Sea
Diamonds’ equity and a first refusal on Mr Collins’s holding,
said to be about 80 per cent. Sea Diamonds in turn holds some
44 per cent of the share capital of Marine Diamonds, General
Mining holding 25 per cent of the balance, Anglo Transvaal
16 per cent, and another Oppenheimer company, Middle
Witwatersrand (Western Areas) Ltd., administered by Anglo
Transvaal, seven and a half per cent. The remainder is held by
the original concession holders. Middle Witwatersrand has a
right of 10 per cent participation in any prospecting ventures
undertaken by Anglovaal Rhodesian Exploration Ltd., of whose
equity 50 per cent is held by Kennecott Copper. Everything
seems to move round in circular motion within a ring that has
no end. Mr Sam Collins may have acted quickly and shrewdly
in staking his claim to an offshore diamond reef, and he will in
all probability make a killing. But the greatest winners will
certainly prove, in the long run, to be Mr Oppenheimer and his
cohorts. The backstage goings-on to obtain control of what
promises to be a most highly profitable venture prompted
The Economist’s Johannesburg correspondent to observe that
‘the full story of the recent negotiations, if it ever emerged,
might tell of a fierce struggle for control between South Africa’s
mining magnates in the best tradition of the rough, tough early
days of Kimberley and the Rand’ (16 March 1963).

It is unlikely that De Beers will be able to make its way into
the Japanese company now setting up plant in Japan for the
manufacture of synthetic diamonds, which will initially turn
out 300,000 carats a year to reach 600,000 annually. De Beers,
in association with Société Miniére de Beceka, have their own
plant in South Africa for the manufacture of synthetic diamond
grit operated by Ultra High Pressure Units. General Electric of
America also has a process for turning out manufactured
diamonds. The Japanese say theirs is not the same. And we
have referred earlier on to Sibeka’s interest in the possibility of
producing artificial diamonds. There have been several attempts
to create diamonds by a factory process but they have, until
now, proved somewhat uneconomic. With the strong likelihood
that synthetic stones which can compete in price and per-
formance with the natural product will soon be produced,
another blow may be struck at the developing producer
countries of Africa.

11. Mining interests in Central
Africa

IF we examine the intricacies of the Anglo-American extension
through the exploitation of Africa’s raw materials, we find its
strong arm holding down the wealth of Rhodesia, South Africa
and South-west Africa both through direct holdings as well
as through those of its American Engelhard and Kennecott
Copper associates and the British South Africa Company Ltd.

The British South Africa Company was a creation of Cecil
Rhodes’ genius in empire building. Watching the scramble for
lands in South Africa in the early 1890s, he decided that unless
he got in quickly, other European adventurers would take up
‘large tracts of valuable country ruled by savage native chiefs
in the interior of Africa’. Using his notorious agents, Rudd,
Maguire, Rochford and Thompson, war was provoked be-
tween the Matabeles of what is now known as Rhodesia and
their chief, Lo Benguela. Troops of the South African Com-
pany, which was granted a royal charter in 1889, went
ostensibly to the support of the chief against his people. This
trick of Rhodes, described by certain historians as ‘adroit
handling’, secured the company a concession to work mineral
rights in the vast expanse of land that now forms the whole of
Rhodesia.

When Lo Benguela woke up to the bitter realisation of the
trickery that had divested him and his people of the rights in
their own land, he petitioned Queen Victoria as follows:
‘Some time ago a party of men came into my country,
the principal one appearing to be a man named Rudd.They
asked me for a place to dig gold, and said they would give
me certain things for the right to do so. I told them to bring
what they would give and I would then show them what I
would give.

A document was written and presented to me for signa-
ture. I asked what it contained, and was told that in it were
my words and the words of these men. I put my hand to it.

About three months afterwards I heard from other
sources that I had given by that document the right of all
the minerals of my country. I called a meeting of my
Indunas and also of the white men, and demanded a copy
of the document. It was proved to me that I had signed
away the mineral rights of my whole country to one Rudd
and his friends. I have since had a meeting of my Indunas
and they will not recognise the paper, as it contains neither
my words nor the words of those who got it.
After the meeting I demanded that the original document
be returned to me. It has not come yet, although it is two
months since, and they promised to bring it back soon.
The men of the party who were in my country at the time
were told to remain until the document was brought back.
One of them, Maguire, has now left without my knowledge
and against my orders.

I write to you that you may know the truth about this,
and may not be deceived.

With renewed and cordial greetings,
Lo Benguela.’

Who in those days gave back land filched by whatever means
from ‘savage native chiefs’? And who today will give them
back to the people from whom they were taken unless that a
people insist on their return by their determined and united
will expressed by a Union Government? 

At the close of the nineteenth century, Rhodes, dreaming
of a Cape to Cairo empire, pushed from Matabeleland into
Mashonaland across the Zambesi, into the country now called
Zambia. ‘Thus he drove a wedge between the Portuguese
colonies of Mozambique and Angola. All this was done with
the buccaneers of his South Africa Company, which had
received three supplementary charters since the initial one
was granted in 1889.

Originally the company had administrative rights over
territory in Southern Africa lying to the north of Bechuanaland,
to the north and west of the Transvaal and west of Portuguese
East Africa. It also had rights to extend the Cape railway and
telegraph systems northward and to make concessions of
mining, forest or other rights, and much more besides. Its
administrative and monopoly rights in Northern and Southern
Rhodesia were ceded to the British Government only as late
as 1923-4. Mineral rights in the Rhodesias, however, were still
retained, as well as a half interest for forty years in the next
proceeds of the disposal of land in North-western Rhodesia.
In return, the British South Africa Company received a cash
payment from the British Government of £3,750,000. The
commutation of its half interest in the proceeds of land disposal
was made in 1956 for an annual payment of £50,000 for the
remaining eight years to run from 31 March 1957.

A cash purchase of the mineral rights was made by the
Southern Rhodesia Government in 1933 for £2 million, this
time from African taxpayers’ money. This still left the com-
pany with its mineral rights in Northern Rhodesia which, by
arrangement, it is to enjoy until 1 October 1986. However,
since 1 October 1949, it was paying to the Government of
Northern Rhodesia 20 per cent of the net revenue from these
mineral rights, which sum was regarded as an ‘expense’ for
the purpose of Northern Rhodesian income tax. Furthermore,
‘net revenue’ was defined as the profits of the company
derived from its mineral rights calculated in the same manner
as for the purpose of Northern Rhodesian income tax, i.e. after
expenses had been charged against it. The arrangement
Provided for the non-imposition of mineral royalties as such
in Northern Rhodesia, while Her Majesty’s Government
undertook to secure so far as possible that any government
which became responsible during the thirty-seven-year period,
that is, up to 1 October 1986, for the administration of
Northern Rhodesia should be bound by these arrangements.

The British South Africa Company, in spite of recent action
taken by the government of Zambia to secure mineral rights,
is still extremely powerful. It owns forests, agricultural estates
and real property in Zambia, Rhodesia, and in Bechuanaland.
It also has mineral rights in 16,000 square miles of Malawi
territory. It formed Cecil Holdings Ltd. to acquire the whole
share capital of British South Africa Company’s subsidiaries,
with the exception of Rhodesia Railways Trust Ltd. Another
formation, British South Africa Investments Ltd., acquired
the greater part of the parent company’s investments in 1958.
Other subsidiaries include:

British South African Company Management Services Ltd.
British South Africa Citrus Products Ltd.

Charter Properties (Pvt) Ltd.

Indaba Investments (Pvt) Ltd.

Beit Holdings (Pvt) Ltd.

Jameson Development Holdings (Pvt) Ltd.

British South Africa Company Holdings Ltd. (U.K.).

The British South Africa Company was divested of the
greater part of its holdings in companies operating primarily
in the Republic of South Africa by its participation in the 1961
exchange of shares with De Beers Investment Trust Ltd. It
still retains its holding of 700,000 shares in Union Corporation
Ltd.

The company’s close association with Mr Harry Oppen-
heimer and the Anglo American Corporation in the Rhodesias
is to be drawn tighter by means of a proposed share deal
between them by which 1-2 million ordinary ten shilling shares
of Anglo American will be exchanged for £2-5 million in £1
shares of New Rhodesia Investments Ltd., a public company
registered in Rhodesia and equally owned by Mr Oppen-
heimer’s Brenthurst Investment Trust (Pty) Ltd. and British
South Africa’s tributary, Cecil Holdings.

New Rhodesia Investments include: mining finance, 45-94
per cent; gold, 14-45 per cent; diamonds, 9-38 per cent; coal,
9-49 per cent; sundry companies, 1-9 per cent. On 31 December
1962, the market value of these holdings was put at £10,500,000
while New Rhodesia Investment’s net assets stood at
£12,100,000. As for Anglo American Corporation, its net
assets at the end of 1961 were £114,500,000. New Rhodesia’s
‘important block of shares’ in Consolidated Mines Selection
Trust Ltd. will be increased as a result of the current financial
arrangement with Anglo American, whose own share capital
will be augmented from £9 million to £10 million by the
creation of another two million ten shilling shares.

The complicated links between superficially separate entities
are shown by their investments in concerns of common
interest. New Rhodesia’s major buyings into the Diamond
Corporation, Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Co. Ltd.
and Rhodesian Anglo American Ltd. tie up closely with Anglo
American’s activities in the Rhodesias and in the Congo and
Portuguese territories.

Johannesburg Consolidated is concerned principally with
diamonds, copper, gold and platinum. It also carries on
prospecting operations, mainly in South Africa and Rhodesia.
Its subsidiary companies include, among others, Barnato
Brothers Ltd. and Barnato Holdings Ltd., and the important
African Asbestos-Cement Corporation Ltd. An associated
company, Matte Smelters (Pty) Ltd., is jointly owned by
Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd. and Johnson Matthey &
Co. Ltd. Johnson Matthey, a U.K. firm treating copper,
nickel, platinum and other metals, supervised the erection of
plant in the vicinity of Rustenberg to treat part of the product
of Matte Smelters. Johannesburg Consolidated’s last issue of
shares was in 1958, when 600,000 were issued to New Rhodesia
Investments.

Rhodesian Anglo American has large shareholdings in the
leading copper mines of Rhodesia. These direct holdings are
swollen by those of companies in which it has interest. Thus a
52-39 per cent interest in the ordinary ‘A’ stock of Rhokana
Corporation Ltd. gives it an added interest of 17-63 per cent
in Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd., in which its
direct participation is 21-429 per cent. Through its penetration
of Rhokana and Nchanga, Rhodesian Anglo American has an
indirect interest in Rhodesia Copper Refineries Ltd. Again, its
oblique participation in Mufulira Copper Mines Ltd. via
Rhokana, increases its own participation of 572,213 shares to
13-92 per cent. In Rhodesian Alloys (Pvt) Ltd. a producer of
ferro-chrome, it has 263,226 shares, and in Rhodesia Broken
Hill Development Co. Ltd., 1,425,905 stock units. An almost
25 per cent holding of Kansanshi Copper Mining Co. Ltd. has
been secured by the acquisition of 394,209 shares. Rhodesian
Anglo American’s direct and indirect participation in Bancroft
Mines Ltd. amounts to 24-54 per cent. Rhokana gives it an
interest in Chibuluma Mines Ltd., while Rhokana in associa-
tion with Nchanga leads it into Kalindini Exploration Ltd.
A holding of 34,100 shares gives it a substantial purchase into
Kasempa Minerals Ltd., a company carrying out prospecting
operations in the western province of Zambia.

Nor are other prospecting companies ignored by Rhodesian
Anglo American. Thirty-one and a half per cent of Anglo
American Prospecting (Rhodesia) Ltd. has come under its
control, and 333,375 shares of Chartered Exploration Ltd.
Iron, steel and coal also come within its range. It owns 596,600
shares in Lubimbi Coal Areas Ltd., holding prospecting rights
for coal over an area of approximately 130 square miles in the
Southern Rhodesian mining district of Bulawayo. This share-
holding gives Rhodesian Anglo American 65 per cent control
of Lubimbi, the other 35 per cent belonging to Wankie
Colliery, two million of whose shares are in Rhodesian Anglo
American hands. Forty per cent gives it a major part of the
Iron Duke Mining Co. Ltd., and it also has a substantial
interest in the Rhodesian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd.

Sundry other interests make Rhodesian Anglo American a
leading controller of Zambia’s economic life. Finance and
investment are included by, among others, 20 per cent of
Rhodesian Acceptances Ltd., and a half share in Overseas &
Rhodesian Investment Co. Ltd. Rhoanglo Mine Services Ltd.,
wholly owned, provides a valuable source of income for
administrative and other services. Cement and clay bring it
into the building and allied trades through 148,961 shares in

Premier Portland Cement Co. (Rhodesia) Ltd. and 25 per cent
of Clay Products (Pvt) Ltd.

Bancroft Mines seems to provide the richest pickings for
the cast-iron digestion of the Anglo American hydra. This
company was formed only in 1953, to take up from ‘the owners
of the mineral rights, the British South Africa Co.’ special
grants of mining rights and prospecting rights acquired from
Rhokana. Capital is authorised at £13,750,000. The British
South Africa Co. took up three million shares, Rhokana
9,500,000 and Rhodesian Anglo American 74,700. There was
an interchange of shares with Rhokana as well as with
Rhodesian Anglo American. In 1955 an additional two million
shares were subscribed for by Anglo American and British
South Africa Co., who have provided loans of £2 million and
£3 million respectively.

Anglo American, Rhodesian Anglo American, Nchanga and
Rhokana were given an option on three million of Bancroft’s
ordinary shares up to 31 March 1963. In December 1961, the
right was exercised on a million of the shares, of which
Rhodesian Anglo American acquired 400,000.

Rhodesian Anglo American’s own capital is £7 million and
its consolidated net profit for the year ended 30 June 1961 was
£20,590,783 after providing £11,541,475 for taxation. Divi-
dends absorbed £5,403,535.

These tightly braided interests are of special concern to the
people of Zambia and Rhodesia, whose existence and fate they
dominate. Not for nothing is Mr Harry Oppenheimer enlarging
his own personal stake through the proposals concerning the
Share exchange between Anglo American and British South
Africa Co. in New Rhodesia Investments, a tributary of
British South Africa’s tributary, Cecil Holding. By the
arrangements, British South Africa will have wider share in
Anglo American’s activities through the establishment of a
local Rhodesian Board for the chartered company, under the
chairmanship of Sir Frederick Crawford.

Sir Frederick Crawford is at present the company’s resident
director in Rhodesia. As a former Governor of Uganda, he
brought with him his proconsular experience in the ruling of

‘natives’. Uganda also provides as local director in Zambia,
C. P. S. Allen, until recently Permanent Under-Secretary of
State to its Prime Minister. Thus are imperialist agents
rewarded for their services to their real masters. Opposition
to the establishment of the local board was met by British
South Africa Co.’s president, P. V. Emrys-Evans, with the
explanation that it will provide a greater degree of autonomy
for local management, and will strengthen the company’s
representation in Zambia. Mr Emrys-Evans is himself a
director of Anglo American Corporation, as well as of Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Ltd. Mr Emrys-Evans carries the
interests of Barclays Bank D.C.O. by his directorship of the
bank, and his solicitude for Rhodesia’s development is implicit
in his seat on the board of Rhodesia Railways Trust Ltd., a
British South Africa Company subsidiary. His further con-
nection with Oppenheimer’s far-flung empire is confirmed by
his membership of the London Committee of Rand Selection
Corporation Ltd. The death of Lord Robins elevated him from
the vice-presidency to the head of the British South Africa
Co.’s board, where among his colleagues were the late Sir C. J.
Hambro, Harry Oppenheimer, L. F. A. d’Erlanger and another
former pro-consul, Viscount Malvern, who brings with him
the blessings of the Merchant Bank of Central Africa, Scottish
Rhodesian Finance Ltd., and the Standard Bank of South
Africa.

A good deal of Mr Emrys-Evans’ 1962 annual report to the
shareholders was devoted to what is described as ill-informed
criticism of the ‘group’s alleged policy of removing large sums
of money from the country while being unwilling to invest in
its development’. The attempt to rebut this criticism by the
affirmation that over ten years the company had invested over
£10 million in the territory, an average of over £1 million a
year, would not convince Rhodesian Africans, who were well
aware that the company received in gross income from its
Northern Rhodesian copper royalties alone in the year 1961/2,
the sum of £10,900,000. Taxation goes to the United Kingdom
and South Africa, as also do dividends, which, for the year
1959-60, absorbed £4,128,863 out of a consolidated net profit
of £8,148,245, arrived at after writing off almost £1 million
for depreciation of investments and over £5,400,000 for
taxation.

Rhodes’ original links with the Rand and Kimberley mines
have been knit more closely together by a thousand strands
with Rhodesia and Zambia than it was possible for him to
envisage at the time, though it was his overriding hope and
ambition. This interwoven fabric partly provides the hang-
man’s rope that is trying to strangle African independence and
the political unification of Africa.

12. Companies and combines

To give anything like a complete account of the complicated
network of foreign companies which at present governs so
much of Africa’s economic life, would be impossible within
the space of a single book. Yet some reference to the most
important of them is necessary, and in many cases their con-
necting interests can be shown in diagram form. Behind the
facade of separateness strong connecting links bind these
powerful firms together.

In East Africa, one of the most powerful concerns is
Tanganyika Concessions. The name is misleading. It was
actually registered in London towards the end of January 1899.
Today control of the company is wielded from Salisbury,
Rhodesia, whence it was removed in the latter part of 1950.
Operations in Tanganyika have not yet been fully developed,
though they cover two important gold mines and a mineral
company, and include some prospecting. The company’s writ
has greater significance in Zambia, where it acquired from
British South Africa Co. a concession over a large area,
together with certain prospecting rights. From Zambia its
activities spawn into the Congo, where it controls a mineral
concession of 60,000 square miles secured from the Katanga
(Belgian) Special Committee. For giving Tanganyika Con-
cession rights over this expanse of Congolese land, the Katanga
Committee enjoyed the benefit of a 60 per cent share in the
royalty paid by Union Miniere.

We must not for one moment, however, allow ourselves to
be led into the error of thinking that Tanganyika Concessions
thus permitted themselves to be ‘bested’ by the Special
Committee. The company became a member of the Com-
mittee. In the way of financiers who, cautiously and shrewdly,
do not place all their eggs in a single basket, a new organisation
was created to take care of a concession covering a surface
about three-fifths the size of Ghana. This is the celebrated
Union Miniere du Haut Katanga, whose reputation over the
years has become notorious for the merciless exploitation of
the Congo.

Another strategic interest of Tanganyika Concessions is the
railway running from Lobito Bay in Angola up to the Angola-
Congo border, operated by the Benguela Railway Company
(Companhia do Cominho de Ferro de Benguela). The railway
company is a creation of Tanganyika Concessions which holds
£2,700,000 or 90 per cent of its £2 shares, as well as the whole
of the debenture capital. The Benguela Railway, during 1961,
built a branch line from the town of Robert Williams into the
mining region of Guima, which was opened in August 1962.
Commonwealth Timber Industries Ltd., a vast forestry and
lumber concern, is also 60 per cent owned by Tanganyika
Concessions.

Novobord (U.K.) Ltd., the English affiliate of Common-
wealth Timber, was able, with the assistance of the African
companies with which Société Générale is associated, to
construct a sawmill and factory for the manufacture of
fibrewood panels at Thetford in Norfolk. The factory’s
capacity will make possible the production of about 25 million
square feet of panels yearly, the capital invested being around
£2 million.

When Tanganyika Concessions was about to change its
headquarters from London to Salisbury, it gave an under-
taking to H.M. Treasury which no doubt had some bearing
on the British government’s vacillating policy in the breakdown
of the Central African Federation. It must also colour its
behaviour in regard to the Congo and to Portuguese rule in
Africa. The undertaking provided that for a minimum period
of ten years, Tanganyika Concessions would not, without con-
sent of the British Treasury, ‘dispose of or charge or pledge
its interests or any part thereof in Union Miniére du Haut
Katanga or the Benguela Railway’ except, in the case of the
latter, to the Portuguese Government under the terms of the
Concessions Agreement.

The limitation did not end with the expiration of the ten-
year period, as a conjunctive clause provided that subsequently
‘no sale or other disposal of such interests or any part thereof
(except as aforesaid) shall be made without the securities
proposed to be sold or otherwise disposed of first being offered
to H.M. Treasury at the same price and on the same terms as
have been offered to a third party’.

These provisions have given the British Government a
direct concern in the operations of Tanganyika Concessions,
Union Miniére and the Benguela Railway which is bound to
influence their behaviour in relation to the independence
struggle in Southern and Central Africa. More particularly, in
view of the special relations which Great Britain has had with
its oldest ally, Portugal. From the point of view of the com-
panies themselves, they must feel encouraged by this special
interest of the British Government in maintaining their
strategic position across the great central belt of Africa.

Tanganyika Concessions, both directly and through Tangan-
yika Holdings, has an important participation in Rhodesia-
Katanga Co. Ltd., with which, in conjunction with Zambesia
Exploring, interests were acquired in the Kakamega Goldfield,
Kenya, which were transferred to Kentan Gold Areas, in which
Rhodesia-Katanga has a substantial holding. Rhodesia- Katanga
is indebted to the British South Africa Co. by reason of the
perpetual mining rights the latter has granted it over any
minerals, including coal but excluding diamonds and precious
stones, which may be found in about 2,500 square miles of
Zambia. Additionally, it has perpetual coal mining rights in
twenty areas of 300 acres, each subject to 15 per cent interest
of the British South Africa Co.

To complete Tanganyika Concessions’ roster of subsidiaries,
there is the wholly owned Tanganyika Properties (Rhodesia)

164

 
 

6 LYVHO
‘pyT soupy soddog payeprjosuos edueyoN
"pyT uonvsopdxsy ruipurye sy
py] ‘udiog Jamog Jepiog oSsuog visapoyy
"PYT SOUL Bqnyeg
“PYT Sour, TYSTQuIeUS)
"PYT SoUTIAL PUIN|NIY,)
"PY souryAY BMOouESTYD
‘py] sorouysy soddog visapoyy
"py sour, Zorouerg
‘pyy sourpy toddos eaynynyy

JsNI J, UODITAG URISOPOyYy

 

‘py sour epnden’y

*pY] saqeisy, Byoure A

uoneiodioz vuryouy

af
‘PIT 09

BBULILY{-PISIPOYY

‘PYT “OD SururyAy

“PYI (HA) Proqoaony raddos rysuesuey

 

‘py sorsnpuy
JOqUIL], YEaMuowU0;

esurjey ynep{ np
aIstUTTA, WoTu/)

 

 

 

‘d.LT SNOISSTONOO VIAIANVONV

 

sisolsolul .suoIsseouo’y ewiAueBue |

165

‘p¥Y] (OZ JUSUTSBAUT RISOQGUIPT

‘PY] (02 Sur0jdxq eisoquez

“PY s[esouryAl elIMnig

‘PYT ‘OD Sururyyy pjoy e319H

 

"py svary ploy uewsy

"pYT ssurploH
eyrAuesue J,

y__]
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

Ltd., registered in Salisbury, Rhodesia. It provides office and
staff accommodation together with allied services, as well as
holding certain investments.

Consolidated profit made by Tanganyika Concessions for the
year ended 31 July 1961 was £3,296,325 out of a total revenue
of £4,462,667. Its current assets are {4,380,163 in shares and
debentures of Benguela Railway Co.: £5,300,318 in shares and
loan to Commonwealth Timber Industries; {1,317,793 in
Tanganyika Holdings; and £4,019,629 in Union Muiniére,
whose ramifications will be examined in a later chapter.

Coming to the South-West Africa Co. Ltd. we find Anglo
American Corporation and Consolidated Gold Fields merging
to exploit a vast section of the wealth of southern Africa.

The South-West Africa Co. Ltd. was registered in London
on 18 August 1892, and has a special grant of exclusive pros-
pecting and mining rights over some 3,000 square miles of the
Damaraland concession area of South-west Africa. This grant
was made by the Administration of South-west Africa for a
period of five years from 2 January 1942, and has since been
renewed until 2 January 1967. The company also holds mining
areas in various other districts of South-west Africa. It
produces tin-wolfram and zinc-lead concentrates as well as
vanadates.

Large areas of land such as those held by the South-West
Africa Co. demand extremely heavy capital investment to
exploit and encourage the formation of alliances between
groups desirous of controlling output, distribution, and hence
the prices of raw materials. Not only that, it facilitates the
channelling of their processing through the allied organisations.
To pursue this policy of co-ordination, the South-West
Africa Co. signed an agreement with a joint Anglo American-
Consolidated Gold Fields venture by which it sub-leased
certain of its rights to explore and exploit its concessions. See
Chart 3.

The Newmont Mining Corporation was formed in Dela-
ware, U.S.A., on 2 May 1921. The purpose of the company
is to acquire, develop, finance and operate mining properties.
For this purpose a share capital of $60 million has been

166

 

 
 

167

€ LYVHO

               

BUTUIJA, JUOWIMAN

 

saddoz) datyo,.0

  

XPBUITTD eJeIAL UROTIOWY

ysn1 J, WOrd279G uoyeiodiog qowns J,

‘og voLY YINOS YsHIIg

‘|

—ysniJ, wors2]ag uEIsapoYyy IX "OO VOIUAV LSAIM HLOAOS F—— SPP PIOD Josue) MON

 

 

 

  

 

uv y-o[suy uoneiodiog uo SPJPaLY Ploy josuog

 

 

s}sola}uy SAuRdWoD Boy ISAM YINOS
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

authorised. At 31 December 1961, 2,824,518 of the authorised
six million ten-dollar shares had been issued, and paid up.
Mining exploration is carried on by the company through
Newmont Exploration Ltd. (Delaware), Newmont Mining Cor-
poration of Canada Ltd. and Newmont of South Africa (Pty)
Ltd. Chart 4 gives some idea of the extent of their interests.

We have already met certain of the Rio Tinto companies in
Zambia and Rhodesia, and have touched upon others in con-
nection with the Société Générale de Belgique’s associations
with the North American financial and industrial scene. The
Rio Tinto complex is one that would be hard to miss in any
attempt to examine the ramifications of the international
mining world. It stretches from the United Kingdom across
Spain into Africa and over the Atlantic into Canada and the
U.S.A., with forays into Germany, Belgium, Austria, Australia
and elsewhere. The hands of Anglo American Corporation,
Consolidated Zinc Corporation and world-embracing alumin-
ium groups are firmly clasped within it, and representatives of
the Congo combination of companies adorn the directorates
which bear such aristocratic names as Rothschild and
Cavendish-Bentinck.

Though its original interests were mining pyrites in Spain,
the Rio Tinto Co. Ltd. was registered in London in 1873.
Keeping up with the times and the general trend towards
combination and monopoly, the company underwent certain
changes. Its directors were among the most fervent supporters
of General Franco at the time of the Spanish Civil War. This
devotion to the Caudillo’s cause undoubtedly prospered them
so that, together with their associates in the wider financial
sphere, they have been able to spread their tentacles through
the zinc and aluminium industry into the precious metals and
general metals’ fields.

In 1954 Rio Tinto transferred its Spanish assets to a com-
pany which it formed in Spain with a capital of 1,000,000,000
pesetas, under the title of Companhia Espanola de Minas de
Rio ‘Tinto S.A. For this worthy proof of its sensitiveness to
Spanish patriotism, it received a compensation of 36,666,830
pesetas in settlement of profits accumulated up to | January

168

   

er or err

'

 
 

 

“PYT “9D 8 ToUpsesL) Aus
‘udro9 yer] ysntg

vy LYVHO

 

BOLIFY “S JO

 

‘udi02 yeqyAl poyeures;euy

 

 

oouy

09St,J OP 0119¢)

‘udiog 03399 4
rudiog yaca1g weyayqI0g

 

 

OUIZ, poyepljosuo7

 
 

PY] SouUryAL BS] JUNOTAT

‘oF Suluyay 29
sunpowg uvoweuwy

‘udiog ssddog nag ‘sy

 

 

 

| uoneiodios espoq sdjsyg

 

 

 

SPPIT PIOD josuoh

 

 

S}UIUTISPAUT
SUIUTJA YZIMUOWIUIOZ)

 

Bipeajsny jo
SPL PIO Josuog—

(soUaNPUrT UoT]eFAL)
*O¢) WOIT IqesayAy

‘udiog sourpy snd +4

 

XBUND [eIIA[ URoTIOUIy

 
 

 

sJouyoy raddo-) uerpeurg

 

 

‘O-D Surury,l Sowes9y\]

 

‘udiog qauins J,
NN reddop dag.

 

 

SurUryA]
OUITILIR IAL suyypoug
HO surary 3g SuTUT]AL ™~
ouneg yOIMsunig ‘0-d peo ydasof 3g

 

$}S010}U] S,bUjUI JUOWUMONN

RT] ourz Aasiof MONT

souonpul
II] [OJOYoY 29 uesIOPAy

 

 

DNINIW LNOWMAN}L

169
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

1954, and all the 333,333 ‘B’ shares of 1,000 pesetas each in the
new company. Additionally it was awarded a sterling payment
of £7,666,665. Rio Tinto still draws a retainer as provider of
technical and commercial services in London for the Spanish
company, in which its holding of all the ‘B’ shares still gives
it a direct interest.

Rio Tinto is now an investment holding company, whose
financial operations have brought it into the forefront of
industrial entrepreneurship. Africa is well up among its
spheres of activity, its most important holdings on the con-
tinent being in Rhokana Corporation and Nchanga Copper
Mines, where, as we have seen, it is associated with the British
South Africa Co., Anglo American Corporation, Union Cor-
poration, Tanganyika Concessions, Union Miniére and Rand
Selection Trust in their holdings in the important Rhodesian
and South Africa mining and industrial ventures.

So tortuous and incredibly expansile are the links that tie
the groups exploiting Africa’s resources with those enriching
themselves in other corners of the earth that we should find
nothing remarkable in being led back from Rio Tinto in
Africa, via some of the most powerful American and British
financial forces, into Rio Tinto in Canada.

One of the most lively motivating springs of monopoly is
to forestall in new or unexplored areas the entry of rival groups,
and where this proves abortive or impossible, to collaborate
with them. We shall see in a later chapter how Canadian
Eldorado forced Union Miniére to bring down the price of
uranium and how their interests lock through Sogemines
representation on the former’s board. In the world of Western
free enterprise, competition is being eroded by monopoly’s
role of the lone ranger after undivided profits.

Thus are African riches brought to support the manipulative
ramifications of international finance-capital. Between Société
Générale and Rio Tinto there is interposed a solid phalanx of
interwoven power that moves out stealthily across the world.

Breaking into the aluminium world, Rio Tinto formed an
alliance with Consolidated Zinc Corporation Ltd. This
merger appeared superficially to bring together two powerful

170

- Tore

 

t
}
$
|
I

~—

 

~

NEA mrarmn AN
 

S LYVHO
ogA‘orb‘1—(eIsapoyy) ou1y, ory
o00‘ozL—(eIsapoyy *N) ov], ony
‘PYT SSurpjoHy esroquyeg
‘py] uoneiojdxg uerpeueg ojury, ory
“PYT Mo OWT, ONY
‘pry udiog Sunjowg pue Sumy, yormsunig
“PY] SouljAy vor o.UT,
“pY] soupy wuntuesy) voseqeyyy x1
‘PY] epeury jo 910 uoly o1ura0G—9
"py souryAy UAnoY-o[suy

-—Ul sareys S,0JULT, ON, sazinboe

 

 

 

 

 

ummiuei) oyuoIg | wWosly ony "PYT ‘0D Sururyyy vroqeieg
wuntuery uedsysion | ul ysosaqut BILIFY YINOG Jo ‘od BururyAy OWT], ony
aye] Way | — Burjorjuoo "pyT (esapoyy) oa1L, ory
uintueiy wosty "PYT (Visopoyy WssYyWON) OFT, Ory

‘PYT ‘OD Surpjopy uvtsapoyy, ory, ory

‘PY sourjxy uojsarg “pyy “Ag (eyensny) soupy taddor esueyon

"PY SSuIpjoH{ OWT, ory SSuIpfOH{ OWL], OY “pyT wunr0y,y, uonerodi0_ vueyoyy
— ugipeurs $1So19} UT Lee yas WO ssolajUy UROL

 

"ETT CON OTNTT. AT

171
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

groups having no joint leading strings. This ostensible
separation would mislead only the ignorant. Its subterfuge is
immediately destroyed by a single glance at its combined
directorate, which at once shows up the connections with
South African mining and financial interests. P. V. Emrys-
Evans is a prominent member, and the Rt. Hon. Lord Baillieu,
K.B.E., C.M.G., deputy chairman. Lord Baillieu is also
deputy chairman of the Central Mining and Investment Cor-
poration Ltd., a leading investment and finance house within
the Anglo American group of companies directed by Harry F.
Oppenheimer and C. W. Engelhard. Mr Emrys-Evans is also
important in his own right, being vice-president of the British
South Africa Co. and a director of Anglo American.

However, the connection goes further than that. British
South Africa Holdings Ltd., and some of its associates, under
an agreement dated 7 December 1960, subscribed £10 million
to Consolidated Zinc in the form of 53 per cent loan stock in
return for options to acquire 2,285,714 ordinary shares of {1
each in Consolidated Zinc at a price of 87s. 6d. a share. Here
we enter into the intricate maze of aluminium financial
policies into which Consolidated Zinc has made deep incur-
sions by its alliance with the Kaiser Aluminium & Chemical
Corporation in Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation (Pty)
Ltd., commonly known as Comalco. The options acquired by
British South Africa Holdings can be exercised any time
between 1 June 1966 and 1 July 1968 or the date on which
Commonwealth or its associated operating companies have
produced a total of 200,000 long tons of aluminium ingots in
the proposed new refinery to be erected by Comalco, which-
ever is the later.

Kaiser Aluminium’s principal interest is in its wholly owned
Kaiser Bauxite Co., Jamaica. In addition to its mining activities,
Kaiser operates processing and chemical plants in the United
States and Canada and has investments in aluminium, mining,
reduction and fabricating facilities and marketing industries
in the United Kingdom, South America, Africa and Asia. It
operates through two fully owned subsidiaries: Kaiser Alu-
minium & Chemical Sales Inc. and Kaiser Aluminium
International Corporation. Like Reynolds Metals, Kaiser
Aluminium only broke into the United States aluminium
industry under the impetus of wartime demands for aircraft
metal. Before the second world war, Aluminium Co. of
America—ALCOA—was the sole domestic producer of
primary aluminium.

Consolidated Zinc, with an authorised capital of £25 million,
has extensive interests which make it a formidable controller
of a number of important metals and allied chemical products.
Formed less than fifteen years ago, in February 1949, its pur-
poses were ‘to develop, extend and carry on or finance, either
itself or through any of its subsidiary or associated companies,
the development, extension and carrying on of the lead and
zinc mining and other or raw material producing industries
and the smelting, refining and manufacturing and other
industries associated therewith, throughout the world, and
particularly in the Commonwealth’.

All this apparently has no connection with Africa, but we have
only to look at some of the directorates to discover immediately
how close the links are with the Oppenheimer network and
the financial groups that associate with it.

Such are the mammoth gold-clad interests that are behind
the Consolidated Zinc-Rio Tinto merger. The new holding
company, Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation Ltd., was created by a
financial operation that gave shareholders of Consolidated
Zinc fifty-eight ordinary shares of ten shillings each in the new
company in exchange for every twenty shares of £1 in Con-
solidated Zinc. Rio Tinto stockholders received forty-one
shares of ten shillings each in the new company for every
twenty ordinary stock units of ten shillings held in Rio Tinto.
Preference shares in both companies were also exchanged for
preference shares in the new one.

The merger brings Rio Tinto-Zinc well into the forefront
of the aluminium field, accentuating its already important
Position in the zinc-lead and non-ferrous metals field. It brings
Consolidated Zinc more fully into the sphere of mineral
exploitation in Africa by reason of Rio Tinto’s holdings in
Some of the principal concerns operating in South Africa,

173
 

Consolidated Zinc's Interests

CONSOL ZINC

 

 

| Rio Tinto |

[British S. Africa Holdings Ltd.

 

              

 

{Kaiser Aluminium & Chemical Corpn. Comalco |

 

 

 

}Commonwealth Aluminium Corpn. Pty. Ltd.]
Cobar South

eo ,

Broken Hill Corpn. Zinc Corpn. Pty. Broken Hill Assoc. Smelters Cobar Mines

New Broken Hill Consol. Sulphide Corpn.

_ Broken Hill South

|
Elec. Ref. & Smelting Co.

 

Heron Creek’s Timber Mills
_— North Broken Hill

 

{Aluminium Co. of America (ALCOA) Western Mining Corpn. Ltd. Gold Exploration & Finance Co.

 

Central Norseman Gold Corpn. Ltd. Gold Mines of Australia Ltd.
Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie (Aust.) Lta. . Champagne Syndicate

Great Western Consolidated Central Victoria Dredging Co.
Kalgoorlie Southern Gold Mines Three Springs Talc Pty. Ltd.

CHART 6

aoa)
t™
-

 
 

COMPANIES AND COMBINES

Rhodesia and elsewhere. The connections with the American,
Canadian and Australian industrial and financial scenes are
apparent from the foregoing very brief review. Through these
interests, the Rio Tinto-Zinc combine has additional strings
which lead back again to Africa.

There are some rare and localised non-metallic materials
which are used in basic and secondary industries. These
include asbestos, corundum, mica, vermiculite, phosphate rock,
gypsum, mineral pigments, fluorspar, and silica. The most
important is asbestos. It is found in three principal fibres:
chrysolite, crocidolite or blue asbestos, and amosite. All three
fibres have certain common characteristics. They are all non-
inflammable, non-conductors of heat and electricity; they are
practically insoluble in acids and are capable of being spun
into textiles.

It is slight differences in these qualities that give them
different uses. Chrysolite is the most resistant to fire, and its
strong, fine flexible texture makes it highly suitable for asbestos
textiles and for use in brake linings, clutch facings and insula-
tion fittings. It is used also for asbestos boards and asbestos
cement products. Blue asbestos has greater tensile strength and
resilience, and though not so resistant to fire, withstands acids
and sea-water better. It is used chiefly in the manufacture of
filter cloth, boiler mattresses, insulation packings and asbestos
cement products. Amosite has a fibre length of three to six
inches and has greater resistance to heat than crocidolite and
greater resistance to sea-water than blue asbestos. These
qualities make it particularly suitable for use in spun materials
and aircraft. South Africa is at present almost the only place in
which both blue asbestos and amosite are found. Canada is the
greatest producer of chrysolite; South Africa and Rhodesia are
far behind.

The South African deposits are mainly in Swaziland and
Eastern Transvaal. They are in the virtual control of a British
firm, Turner & Newall Ltd., registered in 1920, which has in
its hands 90 per cent of the British asbestos trade. This fact
enabled it to secure an agreement in 1930 with the Soviet
Union regulating deliveries to the continental market. An
important producer of high grade chrysolite, the Soviet Union
ceased export after the last war.

Superficially unimposing, Turner & Newall’s board has as
its chairman Ronald G. Scothill, who is associated with the
insurance world as director of Liverpool and Globe Insurance
Co. Ltd. and Royal Insurance Co. Ltd., and with finance as
director of the District Bank. Its capital, however, is impres-
sive, being authorised at £60 million with almost £50 million
paid up. Originally £3 million, the increase in the size of the
company’s capital gives an indication of the growth of its
dominance of asbestos mining and allied industries.

This capitalisation becomes more articulate when it is
related to the sweep of the Turner & Newall asbestos kingdom,
which is rooted in African and Canadian mines. A holding
company, it has a network of subsidiaries throughout the world
which manufacture and sell asbestos, magnesia and connected
products. See Chart 7.

A recent survey reveals that some 60 to 70 per cent of the
world’s total business activity is controlled by less than two
per cent of all the companies in the world. The colossal
Unilever Trust is a perfect illustration of this monopolistic
ratio of control.

For millions of housewives there is no such thing as a
corporate entity called Unilever. There is just the daily routine
of choosing between Lifebuoy and Lux, Pepsodent and Gibbs,
Omo and Surf—of buying Lipton’s tea, Wall’s sausages and
Bird’s Eye frozen foods, Flytox, Stork margarine and Harriet
Hubbard Ayer’s cosmetics. From the viewpoint of the tax-
collector also, Unilever is still not a corporate entity but two
separate companies, ‘Unilever Limited’, the British company,
and ‘Unilever N.V.’, the Dutch company. It has subsidiaries
throughout Europe, in Belgium, Austria, Denmark, Germany,
Finland, Italy, Sweden and Switzerland. In all these countries
it tends to control the production of soups, frozen foods, soap,
margarine, insecticides, detergents, cosmetics and edible oils.
It has also powerful and century-old interests in Latin America,
west, central and South Africa, India, Ceylon, Malaysia,
Trinidad, Thailand and the Philippines.

176

  
 

 
 

L LYVHO

uvluoinyy{-ojsuy

 

BpURION ke
ee

“PY SOUITA, YLT Tweseze IA

souryA] ourdnosog arAyupoyA,

‘PY SPUNAL [YIN e8przquooye.y

“PyT Sayed 3g yews

‘udiod sojsaqsy onjg Josuod
*py] (4g) esoury

“PY (‘Aaq) dousg

"Y’S puryenbiry “4 ur shoo

‘PY °0-D sojsaqsy “P

wn

 

SAUTJA, S9qang ya1of

 

 

 

 

‘udios oyiaueyy suyof

 

“PYT SoinqUsA—pyT Sour [TH Ouse ST powuy)

 

soddoy daryQ,0
‘udiog gowns J,
SuTUTTA, JUOWUMIN

 

 

 

SOJSIQSY IeIssEs) —

PY] SOUTIAL Soysaqsy []>q
|

VdVNVO

|

 

 

 

 

TIVMAN GNV WANUOLL

uoneslojdxy ysomuos

"py sojsoqsy uvisapoyy

‘udioz) soysaqsy
[elouay 2 uLIsapoyYy
SaUTJA[ SOWSOqSY

Josuoy ulqnd

SOUTIA, SNYURTUTY MON

SUIUTT, SOISOqSY UBOLIY
|

VOIudvV

 

 

 

 

 

SUOIOAUUOD PUL S}S919}U] S,J[EMAaN P JeUIN] JO aWIOS

~™
™

mt
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

Unilever’s most robust offshoot overseas is the United
Africa Company, through which the Trust became known as
the ‘uncrowned King of West Africa’. The United Africa
Company is the world’s largest international trading company,
and contrary to the belief that the liberation of colonial terri-
tories would automatically suppress monopoly capitalism, the
Unilever empire continues to flourish. This is because it has
known how to adapt its policy to the ‘challenge of the times’,
as a company report puts it. And so, Unilever is applying its
profit-making objectives to other more yielding sectors. It has
accelerated its withdrawal from the West African merchandise
and produce trade to concentrate on development in cars,
engineering and the pharmaceutical sides of the business. ‘The
neo-colonialist aim is not only to export capital but also to
control the overseas market. Thus attempts are subtly made to
prevent developing countries from taking any decisive steps
towards industrialisation, since the exploitation of the in-
digenous expanding market is now the prime objective. If the
attempts to prevent industrialisation fail, then at all costs the
Trust must secure a participation in a development it cannot
prevent. And by its very nature this participation thwarts any
further progress since it ensures a regular flow of payments
into the coffers of monopoly capital in the form of royalties,
patents, licensing agreements, technical assistance, equipment
and other ‘services’. It also gives priority to the assembling and
packaging of foreign products often presented under the false
labels of indigenous concerns. Unilever’s present emphasis on
the packaging industries is no coincidence.

The up-to-date Trust relies less on the amount of the
dividends than on certain clauses in the Company agreements
which make indigenous capital dependent on monopoly capital
for the renewal of contracts and for the allocation of funds. It
is significant that in a recent issue of the New Commonwealth,
the United Africa Company has been referred to as the ‘gentle
giant’. Monopoly methods have become more subtle, but
Lever’s famous statement still seems to hold true: ‘After all we
are working for the permanent interests of Britain’.

13. The tin, aluminium and nickel
giants

THE tin empire of Patino of Canada Ltd. and its associates
spreads from South America to the United Kingdom and
North America and across Africa into the Pacific and Asia.
Capitalised at $10 million, Patino of Canada has issued and
paid up 1,971,839 shares of $2. Of these, 47-2 per cent are held
by a Panamanian financing house within the Patino group,
Compania de Bonos Acciones y Negocios Industriales—
COBANISA. Patino’s purchase into General Tin Investments
Ltd. in 1962 brought this tycoon into a large share of the
United Kingdom spread in the tin-mining and dealing world.
General Tin Investments is charged with acquiring and holding
shares in mining, finance and industrial companies, its principal
holdings being in those companies connected with the tin
industry. It carries out its financing operations through a
wholly-owned subsidiary, General Metal Securities (London)
Ltd. A. Patino presides over both boards where he has as
colleagues Count G. du Boisbouvray, J. Ortiz-Linares and
E. R. E. Carter. Carter is president of Brunswick Mining &
Smelting Corporation and of several other companies associ-
ated with the Patino group. Brunswick comes within the
Morgan sphere of influence through the interest maintained by
St J oseph Lead Co. We also know that Sogemines has con-
cerned itself with a substantial investment with the New
Brunswick Mines of Brunswick Mining. The spokes that lead
out from the Société Générale de Belgique’s African hub into
the affairs of the most powerful financial monopolies in the
world seem ever-increasing.

Patino’s direct investments in Canada cover substantial
holdings in Copper Rand Chibougama Mines Ltd., Advocate
Mines Ltd., Nipissing Mines Co. Ltd. and Brunswick Mining,
By financial jugglery consolidation of the principal Canadian
companies of the group was achieved in 1960. This was done
through an agreement between Copper Rand, Nipissing Mines,
Chibougama Jaculet Mines Ltd., Portage Island (Chibougama)
Mines Ltd., Patino of Canada and Bankmont & Co. a financial
house. Copper is the chief mineral mined, but gold and silver
are also produced. The Copper Rand property covers some
10,000 acres held in four concessions. Portage Island is a
copper-gold property of Copper Rand, and the Jaculet mine a
copper property.

Nipissing enters into the picture as a financial contributor to
the development of the Portage Island property. It is the holder
of a number of mining claims in Quebec and holds diverse
share interests. Its operations branch into the U.S.A. though a
wholly-owned subsidiary, Apalachian Sulphides Inc., with
mining rights to ore deposits in the States of Vermont and
North Carolina. Nipissing bought into Brunswick Mining by
acquiring from a Patino subsidiary, Patino Mines & Enterprises
Consolidated (Inc.), 137,143 shares and $537,429 worth of
5 per cent bonds of Brunswick, giving to Patino 1,061,145
shares of Nipissing. Patino’s holdings in the Chibougama group
and association with Maritimes Mining Corporation and the
Irving Oil Co. Ltd. in a 40 per cent purchase of Brunswick
mining shares extend the Patino empire substantially into fields
other than tin.

American and Belgian mining and financial interests as
powerful as Patino’s have linked together with Patino of Canada
in investigating and developing mineral deposits on an exclusive
basis across 750 square miles of land on the north-eastern coast
of Newfoundland, under rights granted to Advocate. At the end
of 1960 proven ore reserves totalled 35 million tons of com-
mercial grade. Advocate is developing asbestos under a project
undertaken by Patino of Canada in conjunction with Canadian
Johns-Manville Co. Ltd., Amet Corporation Inc. and Financiere
Belge de |’Asbestos-Ciment S.A. The participants have agreed
to place the property on an operating basis by furnishing to
Advocate a total sum of $17,900,000. Canadian Johns-Manville
will contribute 49-62 per cent, Patino 17-3 per cent, Amet and
Financiére Belge 16-54 per cent each. Advocate has been capita-
lised at $23 million and the parties to the agreement share in
the capital ratio to the amount of their contributions, based on
denominations of $100.

Canadian Johns-Manville, which is tied up with the Imperial-
Commerce Bank, the largest in Canada, upon which sits a
director of Johns-Manville, is a fully-owned subsidiary of the
Johns-Manville Corporation of the United States. Its main
interests are in asbestos, which it processes into fibre and
manufactures into building and industrial materials. It is in
control of Advocate’s management, and has also a majority
interest in and management control of Coalinga Asbestos Co.
of California, U.S.A., a joint venture with Kern County Land
Co. The parent Johns-Manville, of America, manufactures
products from asbestos, magnesia and perlite, having manu-
facturing plants in America, Canada and elsewhere.

Advocate has advanced certain monies to Maritime Mining,
which has close relations with Patino by reason of its associa-
tions with the purchase of the St Joseph Lead holdings in
Brunswick Mining. Maritimes’ share of this purchase was 46
per cent at a cost of $4,840,000. Maritime works copper on
claims in New Brunswick, Canada, and properties in New-
foundland owned directly and also indirectly via a fully-owned
subsidiary, Gull Lake Mines Ltd., through which it also owns
all the shares of Gullbridge Mines Ltd. It has an arrangement
with Falconbridge Nickel Mines giving the latter the right to a
maximum one-third participation in any future financing which
Maritime might undertake. Maritime and Patino of Canada
ehare a director in W. F. James who is also on the Falconbridge
board.

Quebec Metallurgical is another holding company having
Wide interests inside and outside Canada. These include a
Platinum property in South Africa’s Transvaal, a small gold
mine in Brazil, and nickel and cobalt interests in New Cale-
donia, where, through links with Patino, it is associated with
Le Nickel.

Unfortunately for Patino, certain assets in Bolivia have had
to be relinquished under a nationalisation programme. Bolivia
was for many more years than its people cared about drained
by foreign interests of its mineral resources, in which tin pre-
dominates, but which also include silver, lead, zinc, antimony
and copper. Its oil deposits were large enough to entice
Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Co., who entrenched themselves by
working a large concession, while the Guggenheim Brothers of
America, as well as British, French and others, gathered in tin
and copper over a long period, paying the Indian workers
around sixpence a day for their labour.

The properties of the Delaware incorporated Patino Mines
& Enterprises Consolidated were nationalised by the Bolivian
Government on 31 October 1952 and vested in a State-owned
property, the Corporacion Minera de Bolivia Comibol. These
Patino properties consisted of mining and placer claims, water
rights, mill sites, reduction, concentrating and hydro-electric
plants, as well as a railway connecting the mines with a point on
the main line of the Antofagasta-Bolivian Railroad Co. Ltd.
Patino Mines formed another Delaware subsidiary in 1959,
Patino Enterprises Inc.

As one of the largest entrepreneurs in the tin industry,
A. Patino has a seat on the main consolidated organisations
looking after the interests of those engaged in this field, usually
in the company of the Count of Boisbouvray and J. Ortiz-
Linares. All three of them are to be found on the board of
British Tin Investment Corporation Ltd., a United Kingdom
company formed in 1932 to take over British-American Tin
Corporation Ltd. Together with its wholly-owned subsidiaries,
Tin Industrial Finance & Underwriting Ltd. and B.T.I.C.
(Overseas) Ltd., British Tin holds large blocks of shares in the
Malayan tin-mining industry, as well as investments in com-
panies producing other metals and minerals.

General Tin Investments has a 55 per cent interest in
Eastern Smelting Co. Ltd., owning smelting works at Penang,
Malaya. A wholly-owned subsidiary of Consolidated Tin,
Williams Harvey & Co. Ltd., holds 75 per cent of the issued
share capital of Makeri Smelting Co. Ltd. incorporated in
Nigeria in 1961. Makeri has built a tin smelter on the Jos
Plateau, Northern Nigeria, which began production in Decem-
ber 1961. Vivian, Younger & Bond Ltd., the sole selling agents
of Consolidated ‘Tin, are well established in Nigeria.

London Tin Corporation Ltd. board does not include any
of the Patino directors, but the relationship with the Patino
interests are obviously established when we note on its board
C. Waite, chairman and managing director of Consolidated Tin
Smelters and its subsidiary Williams Harvey & Co., and a
director of British Tin Investment Corporation and General
Tin Investments. Mr Waite also sits on the board of Consoli-
dated Tin subsidiaries: the Penpoll Tin Smelting Co. Ltd.,
Eastern Smelting Co., Wm. Symington & Sons Ltd. (rubber
merchants) and that of the distributing agents, Vivian, Younger
& Bond.

As director of Southern Kinta Consolidated Ltd., Southern
Malayan Tin Dredging Ltd., Kamunting Tin Dredging Ltd.,
Malayan Tin Dredging Ltd., Mr Waite obviously represents on
those boards the interests (including those of Patino) of Con-
solidated Tin. A director, moreover, of the Chartered Bank and
a member of the London Board of British & Foreign Marine
Insurance Co. Ltd., he certainly represents the financial inter-
ests supporting them. This conclusion is backed by the
directorial presence of Francis G. Charlesworth on British Tin
and as chairman of Malayan Tin Dredging and Southern
Malayan Tin. Mr Charlesworth is also a director of certain
other tin companies operating in the Malayan area, namely
Kramat Pulai Ltd., Ackam Tin Ltd. and Ayer Hitam Tin
Dredging Ltd. He is, moreover, a member of the board of
Locana Mineral Holdings Ltd., which is honoured by includ-
ing a scion of the Austro-Hungarian empire, H.I.R.H. The
Archduke Robert Charles of Austria.

Locana is an investment and holding company, connected
principally with the Canadian mining industry. Mr Charles-
worth is a direct link with the world of tin mining and dealing
through his association with British Tin and its interests in
Malaya. Sitting alongside Mr Charlesworth on the Locana
board are Messrs N. K. Kindhead-Weekes and J. N. Kiek,
Both also sit on the. boards of important South African and
Rhodesian companies.

Mr Kiek is chairman of Chicago-Gaika Development Co.
Ltd., a company existing since 1897 and having seventeen gold
claims in the Sebakwe district of Matabeleland, Rhodesia,
which was at one time within the jurisdiction of the British
South Africa Company. Mr Kiek’s other associations are with
the London and Rhodesian Mining and Land Co. Ltd., owning
directly 384 gold-mining claims, base-metal claims and lands
covering 757,000 acres in Rhodesia. Some of the properties are
leased on a royalty basis, and ranching operations are also
carried on.

Subsidiary companies of London & Rhodesian include
Mazoe Consolidated Mines Ltd., Lonrho Exploration Co. Ltd.
and African Investment Trust Ltd., which took over all the
company’s investments in 1958, except shares in subsidiaries
and trade investments. Its associates include Arcturus Mines
Ltd., Homestake Gold Mining Co. Ltd., Coronation Syndicate
Ltd. and North Charterland Exploration Co. (1937) Ltd.
Among further interests acquired by London & Rhodesian in
1961 were 90 per cent of Consolidated Holdings (Pvt) Ltd.,
100 per cent of Mashaba Gold Mines (Pvt) Ltd., which operates
the Empress Gold Mine at Mashaba, near Fort Victoria,
Rhodesia, 362 per cent of Kanyemba Gold Mines and 51 per
cent of Associated Overland Pipelines of Rhodesia (Pvt) Ltd.,
in exchange for 1,500,000 shares in London & Rhodesian and
an option on another 2 million.

That London & Rhodesian Mining comes within the
Oppenheimer group interests there can be no doubt, despite
the separate front that is kept up. G. Abdinor, a director of
Arcturus Mines, Coronation Syndicate, Homestake, Kenyemba
and Mazoe, is also a member of the boards of Calcon Mines
Ltd. (Northern Rhodesia), Spaarwater Gold Mining Co. Ltd.
and West Spaarwater Ltd., as is also S. F. Dench, who is
chairman of West Spaarwater and of Coronation Syndicate and
Kanyemba. Spaarwater Gold is among the interests of Con-
solidated Gold Fields, while Henderson’s Transvaal Estates
Ltd., of which Mr Dench is a director, comes within the
Oppenheimer African Investment Trust group of holding
companies, on whose board sits Mr Kiek. It is, in fact, the total
owner of African Exploration Co. Ltd. which gives secretarial
aid to West Spaarwater and Coronation Syndicate.

Interestingly enough, Henderson’s Transvaal Estates has a
fully-owned subsidiary, Henderson Consolidated Corporation
Ltd., which itself has a total subsidiary, Mineral Holdings Ltd.,
owning freehold lands in Transvaal and Orange Free State,
totalling 3,706 acres, and mineral rights over a further 689,380
acres. In addition, it has two mineral concessions in Swaziland,
totalling 84,019 acres.

Another direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Henderson’s
Transvaal is Mineral Holdings Investments Ltd., which holds
720,000 shares in Leslie Gold Mines Ltd. and 200,000 in
Bracken Mines Ltd., both of them belonging to the Union
Corporation group of the Oppenheimer empire. Both mines
enjoy a loan of £1 million each from the National Finance
Corporation of South Africa, in which Anglo American
Corporation and a number of other groups and institutions
associated with it have substantial interests.

J. N. Kiek also occupied the managing director’s position on
Rhodesia Railways Trust Co. Ltd., and two other Oppenheimer
financial concerns, Willoughby’s Consolidated Co. Ltd. and
Willoughby’s (Investments) Ewell Ltd. Mr Kiek’s associate
director, N. K. Kindhead-Weekes, is a director of such impor-
tant Oppenheimer enterprises as Wankie Colliery (linked with
Tanganyika Concessions and Union Muniére), Chibuluma
Mines, Chisangwa Mines and Chambishi Mines, and also
Charterland Exploration Ltd., all of them in Rhodesia.
Charterland Exploration has been granted exclusive prospect-
ing rights by British South Africa Co. over areas totalling some
118,000 square miles in Zambia.

_ The Patino network is shown in Chart 8. Of the organisa-
tions dominating the aluminium industry we note first the
Aluminium Co. of America (ALCOA) and the aluminium

185

THE TIN, ALUMINIUM AND NICKEL GIANTS
 

Patino Interests

| Johns Manville f;e+ Imperial Commerce Bank |
|

 

 

 

Sogemines

  

eh hocate Mines Ltd PATINO} |General Tin Investments Brunswick Mining & Smelting Corpn.
Maritime Mining General Metal Securities Amalgamated Tin Mines of Nigeria
Falconbridge Nickel British Tin Investment Corpn. -— London Tin Corporation

Kramat Pulai Ltd.

 

 

Southern Malayan Tin Dredging—+— Penpoll Tin Smelting Co. Ltd.

 

Aokam Tin Ltd. -—— Malayan Tin Dredging Ltd.———_+—- Eastern Smelting Co.
Ayer Hitam Tin Dredging Southern Kinta Consol Ltd. --—j——- Wm. Symington & Sons Ltd.
London & Rhodesian Kamunting Tin Dredging Ltd.——{__ Vivian, Younger & Bond

Mining & Land Co. Ltd.

li i It
Conso me Tin Smelters Royal Exchange Assurance

 

 

Locano Mines and

 

 

 
   

Holdings Ltd. William Harvey & Co.
| British & Foreign Marine
Makeri Smelting Co. Ltd. Assurance Co. Ltd.
(Nigeria) Soc. Générale des Minerais
Mines
Minerais Amalgamated Metal Corpn.
et Metaux

Tanganyika Concessions: Union Miniére: Metalkat
CHART 8

186

 
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

empire of Mellon. This company mines bauxite in Arkansas
and has subsidiaries digging and bringing out ore from far-flung
places to feed the smelting and processing works in the United
States. These are sited mainly in the southern States, though
there are works at Massena, New York. Casting and fabricating
plants are operating in twelve of the American States, while
wholly-owned subsidiaries are exploring for raw materials in
Europe, Central and South America, the Caribbean, Australia
and. Africa.

Surinam Aluminium Co. is the principal ore-producing
subsidiary. It mines bauxite in the Dutch-held territory of
Surinam, part of Guiana, which stretches over the north-
eastern corner of the South American continent lying north of
the Amazon and south of the Orinoco. Under an agreement
with the Surinam Government, Surinam Aluminium has a
75-year bauxite-mining concession. It is building power facili-
ties and will construct a 60,000-ton aluminium smelter. The
eventual construction of a bauxite refinery utilising local ores
is envisaged, according to the company’s publicity material.
Another full subsidiary is mining bauxite in the Dominican
Republic and, in May 1960, mining rights were acquired over
30,000 acres of Jamaica. Chart 9 shows the extent of Alcoa’s
foreign interests.

Because of the anti-trust laws there is legally no direct
connection between Alcoa and Aluminium Ltd., but they are
both owned by the same Mellon-Davis dominated group of
United States shareholders. Two brothers, Arthur V. Davis of
Alcoa and Edward K. Davis of Aluminium Ltd., were for many
years president of the respective companies. When the latter
died in 1947 he was succeeded by his son, Nathaniel V. Davis.
The size of the Davis block of shares in the Mellon aluminium
companies is about a third of that of the Mellons. In 1957
Fortune, the American journal read by all who would be well-
informed on matters of big business, listed Arthur V. Davis as
one of seven persons with fortunes between $400 million and
$700 million. Of the other six, four were Mellons. Aluminium
Ltd’s Davis is a director of the Mellon Bank.

United Kingdom provides as a subsidiary Alcan Industries

187
 

 

ALUMINIUM LTD.

 

Duke-Price Power Co.
Sanquenay Power

Demerara Bauxite Co. Ltd.
Alumina Jamaica Ltd.
Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd.
Sematan Bauxites Ltd.
South East Asia Bauxite Ltd.
Aluminio do Brasil S.A.
Aluminio Minas Gerais S.A.

Afuminium Co. of S. Africa

Alcoa's World-wide Interests

 

ALCOA (U.5.A.)

 

ALCAN (CANADIAN SUBSIDIARY)]

 

Surinam Aluminium Co. Alcan Industries Ltd.
Corporacion Venezolana SA des Bauxites et Alumines
de Aluminio de Provence

Furukawa Aluminium Co. Ltd. Sanquenay Shipping Ltd.
Imperial Aluminium Co. Ltd. Newfoundland Fluorspar Ltd.
Tapas y Envasas S.A. de CV

Alukon S.A.

Rome Cable Corporation

CHART 9

 

2
eo
we
 

r

THE TIN, ALUMINIUM AND NICKEL GIANTS

Ltd., and France contributes a further wholly-owned sub-
sidiary in S.A. des Bauxites et Alumines de Provence, in which
Aluminium Ltd. has invested some $100 million. Its mines
produced 300,000 tons in 1960, from which alumina is pro-
cessed. Making itself independent in the sphere of transport
Alcan created Saquenay Shipping Ltd., fully financed by itself,
to own and charter a fleet of ships for carrying the group’s
bauxite, alumina and ingot.

Though Kaiser and Reynolds set up aluminium companies as
an attempt at independence from the Mellon empire, in the
case of Kaiser financial alliance was formed early. Reynolds also
has not found it possible to keep entirely aloof from the Mellon
tentacles. Formed in mid-1928, Reynolds Metals Co. created in
1940 its subsidiary, Reynolds Mining Corporation, to work
6,100 acres of bauxite land which it had obtained in Arkansas
and to mine fluorspar in Mexico, which is shipped for process-
ing at the company’s works in America.

Abroad, Reynolds owns bauxite mines and exploration tracts
in north-east British Guiana, as well as in Haiti and Jamaica.
The dried ores are shipped to plants in Massachusetts, Dela-
ware, Arkansas and Texas, U.S.A., more than 3 million tons
having been mined and shipped during 1961. Other subsidiaries
and affiliates operate in Bermuda, Venezuela, Philippines,
Mexico, Canada, Australia, Africa, Columbia and other parts
of the world. Reynolds Jamaica Mines Ltd. in 1957 acquired
the right from the Jamaican Government to mine bauxite for
99 years on all lands then owned or held by it under option in
return for ore royalties and taxes. These lands amounted to
74,000 acres. Mining leases have been obtained on 5,822 acres.

The United Kingdom end of the Reynolds’ aluminium
activities is operated through British Aluminium Ltd. At one
time it looked as though Mellon would take over the British
company, but an alliance between Tube Investment Ltd. and
Reynolds secured them 96 per cent control of British Alu-
Minium, T.I. taking 49 per cent and Reynolds 47 per cent.
The Commonwealth, Europe, Asia and Africa are embraced
within the company’s sphere of activities, its subsidiaries and
affiliates controlling power resources, bauxite properties, pro-
cessing works, even a Grand Hotel, and a pension trust, all of
which are listed among Tube Investment’s interests as the
major parent company.

British Aluminium took over Reynolds T.I. Aluminium in
mid-1961, owned at the time 51 per cent by T.I. and 49 per
cent by Reynolds. Members of the Reynolds’ family sit on the
British Aluminium board, which accommodates W. B. C.
Perrycoste, director of Ghana Bauxite Co. Ltd., a wholly-
owned subsidiary of the company, registered in London in 1933,
Other African interests are represented by E. F. O. Gascoigne,
chairman of Tanganyika Holdings, Kentan Gold Areas, Zam-
besia Exploring and Zambesia Investment, all within the
Tanganyika Concessions sphere. The ‘objective’ British press
is also represented by the presence on British Aluminium’s
board of Sir Geoffrey Crowther, one-time editor of The
Economist and now its deputy chairman. Commercial Union
Assurance is also among Sir Geoffrey’s and Lord Plowden’s
directorships.

FRIA Cie Internationale pour la Production de l’Alumine,
Guinea, is one of British Aluminium’s biggest interests in
Africa, in which it holds 10 per cent of the shares. The project
is to produce, initially, 480,000 tons of alumina annually, of
which 10 per cent will be available to British Aluminium.

The Mellons were the original party directly interested in
developing Guinea’s bauxite resources but, unable to force the
pressure on the newly independent African State, their people
were forced to retire, having fruitlessly disbursed, according to
their own estimates, some $20 million. Other partners in Fria
are:

Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation, U.S.A. 48:5%

Pechiney-Ugine, France 265%
Aluminium Industrie Aktiengesellschaft,
Switzerland 10%

Vereinigte Aluminium-Werke A.G., Germany 5%

Olin Mathieson is within the Rockefeller sphere of influence
represented on the chemical company’s board by Lawrence
Rockefeller, who acts for the family in its activities outside oil.

Control, however, is shared with the Morgans. Thus, the
Mellon group gave way to an overwhelmingly more power-
ful compact of interests hidden behind the Olin Mathieson
facade.

The second-largest holder of Fria is a combination of the
Pechiney and Ugine companies. Pechiney is an abbreviation of
Compagnie des Produits Chimiques et Electrometallurgiques.
Among its directors is Paul Gillet, an honorary governor of
Société Générale de Belgique, chairman of Union Minieére, and
associate of many of the foremost concerns exploiting Africa’s
resources. Its chairman is Paul de Vitry, a director of the
Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas. This bank, of which Henry
Lafond was also a director, besides sitting with Paul de Vitry
on Pechiney, operates in the Congo and South Africa. In fact
it is ubiquitous in the new ventures going forward in Africa,
especially those in the new States bordering the Sahara.

Pechiney, registered in Paris at the opening of the year 1896,
is the continuation of a company formed over a hundred years
ago in 1855 and, like the other leading mining and metallurgical
companies in France, has links with the country’s leading
banking houses. Its proliferations are manifold, covering the
production of bauxite, barytes and lignite, chemicals manu-
facture, the processing of aluminium and other metals and
electrometallurgical products. It manufactures almost every-
thing from plastics, through iron alloys, graphite products, up
to new metals and nuclear products. It holds part and total
portions of affiliated companies in France and other countries
in Europe, Africa and elsewhere. Its mining operations spread
from north to south of France and into Africa.

Responsible today for four-fifths of France’s output of alu-
minium, Pechiney’s trading in the metal accounts for nearly
60 per cent of its turnover. Its only sizeable French competitor
is Ugine, which collaborates with Pechiney on investment
policy, as we note above, and in a joint sales subsidiary,
Aluminium Francais. Both firms are expanding rapidly, and
Pechiney has as widespread operations as the British and
American aluminium companies, though the latter have greater
output. It is expected that Pechiney-Ugine capacity may reach
300,000 tons by 1963. Pechiney uses 15 per cent of a total
French power output, so that the discovery of natural gas at
Lacq in south-western France made a considerable contribu-
tion to its expansion. It had pushed the aluminium sector of its
exports to 37 per cent and hopes to save on its production costs
by the introduction of a new process for reducing bauxite to
aluminium. A pilot plant has been put into operation and its
success will enable Pechiney to expand into new aluminium
industries.

Through the Banque de Paris, which is said to be the biggest
shareholder in the important Franco-Norwegian chemical con-
cern, Norsk Hydro, majority-controlled by the Norwegian
Government, Pechiney may become linked with the project.
The Norwegians are anxious to increase their output from its
present level of 200,000 tons to 600,000 tons by 1970. Already
Pechiney is in consortia operating in Greece, Spain and the
Argentine, and has holdings in Senegal and Madagascar pro-
jects. As a matter of fact, there is hardly a new consortium
springing up in Africa today, particularly in the Mahgreb, in
which Pechiney does not have an oar. It certainly has a
watchful eye on the vast natural gas deposits of the Sahara,
which are not uneconomically distant from the bauxite fields
of Mali.

The international nickel field binds a select coterie of extrac-
tive, processing and financing concerns whose control keeps it
within fairly exclusive numerical limits. Grouped around the
International Nickel Co. of Canada Ltd.—INCO—Falcon-
bridge, Sherritt Gordon Mines Ltd. of Canada and Faraday
Uranium Mines Ltd. and Freeport Sulphur Co. of the United
States are not geographically confined. In unravelling their
engagements, we find their penetrations in Africa as well as in
other parts of the world.

Inco’s direct link with the Oppenheimer mining interests in
Africa has already been made apparent through the interlocking
directorships of Sir Ronald L. Prain and Sir Otto Niemeyer.
We will see further how, through its interests in certain mines,
these are connected indirectly with combinations having definite
ties with the exploitation of Africa’s mineral resources. It 1s

192

  

 
 

OV dsoAq-ururunypy 94dutesa A -

yeyos|jasosuon yy
sLaysnpuy wniununyy-

lesaruNyA, UOTUG, YIM suoTauUOD)
quis) -Aourypag 4

(gousnyuy jo s1aydg sayjayayxo0y)
‘udiog jeormsyD uoseiyjeyA, UO +

 

suIuUIN, yp uononpolg ey nog
d[BUOleUuToJUy oIDZ) Vly

 

 

 

OL LYVHO
yUSUT}SIAUT visaquiezy
suu0jdxyq visoquiez

SEOIY ploy urwoy
ssulpjoyYy eythuesue y,

:$}S9I9]UT ULOLIFY 19YIO}
*pYT °0-D oyxneg eueyy-

uINIUIUINTY s}UsWysaAUT
aqny, spjousoy 5

   

umrununTy Yysbig

 

      

  

epeuer) jo ojUry, Ory

  

‘udiog
jodeg pur 1amog isanyyeg 4

udiog TaMOg BIquUIN[OD

  

jUaWYSIAUT OqnN J,

 

"PYT souryy]

voreulel sppousoy

 

| NOILLVYOduoo ONINIW SQ'IONADTY

 

| ANVdNOO IVLHYW SA TONATY

 

 

 

$}Sa19}U] SpjouAoy

193
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

when the financial interests behind them are examined that we
find the continuity of power.

The name Mond immediately brings to mind nickel, as well
as explosives, chemicals and arms, and we find it linked to the
most powerful international nickel organisation under the form
of International Nickel Co. (Mond) Ltd. It was the founder of
Brunner Mond & Co. Ltd., Ludwig Mond, who, having
invented the ammonia soda process and found a cheap source
of power from small coal, discovered a method of recovering
nickel from low-grade ores. This led to the finding, acquisition
and development of mines in Canada, the world’s present chief
source, the ores coming almost totally from the Sudbury
district of Ontario. Brunner Mond, together with Novel
Industries, United Alkali Co. Ltd. (an amalgamation of forty-
eight works) and British Dyestuffs Corporation Ltd., were knit
together in December 1926 to form Imperial Chemical
Industries Ltd.

Mond Nickel Co. Ltd. was established in 1914 to exploit the
mine that adjoined Inco’s properties on the Sudbury range.
The interests of both companies were fused in 1928. Change of
name to its present form was made in February 1961, and the
company is a subsidiary of Anglo Canadian Mining & Refining
Co. Ltd., which owns the 9 million shares issued out of the
11 million authorised to compose the capital of £5 million.
Anglo-Canadian is itself a wholly-owned subsidiary of Inco.

Among the extensive properties and plants owned by Inter-
national Nickel Mond in the United Kingdom are a refining
works in South Wales and a precious metals refinery in a
London industrial area, a number of rolling mills in various
parts of Britain, as well as the entire share capital of Henry
Wiggin & Co. Ltd., manufacturers of nickel and nickel alloys
and other products. Two interesting items in Nickel Mond’s
treasury are the entire capital of Clydach Estates Ltd. and
Mond Nickel (Retirement System) Trustees Ltd. This is the
United Kingdom end of Inco, which has appointed its delegate
board and consolidates the U.K. accounts with its own.

In order to keep its plants working to fullest capacity Inco
has arrangements with associates for the treatment of their
products. Hence certain nickel concentrates in excess of its own
treatment facilities are worked for Sherritt Gordon Mines, and
there is an agreement with Texas Gulf Sulphur Co., covering
the operation of a pilot plant to investigate processes for the
recovery of elemental sulphur. These agreements issue out of
certain common holdings that give identity of interest to
apparently competitive concerns, tied up with oil and its allied
financial groups.

The controlling interests in Inco are not apparent as there is
no obvious United States parent, although American capital
from most of the leading financial groups predominates, and
Inco owns the entire capital stock of The International Nickel
Co. Inc. which owns the operating assets located in the United
States, and of Whitehead Metal Products Co. Inc., American
distributors of non-ferrous metals. Laurence Rockefeller is on
the United States Inco board. The Canadian company’s chair-
man is H. S. Wingate, a director of the American banking house
of J. P. Morgan & Co. and of the Canadian Pacific Railway.
William C. Bolenius, an Inco director, also sits on directorates
of various Bell Telephone companies, as well as on that of the
Guaranty Trust Co. of New York, Morgan-controlled. Another
Inco director, R. S. McLaughlin, is a director of General
Motors and on the board of the Toronto-Dominion Bank,
which links with du Pont interests. Du Pont itself is under
heavy Morgan influence. Donald Hamilton McLaughlin is
President of the American Trust Co., which has three inter-
locking directorates with Morgan banks and insurance com-
panies. He also presides over the board of Homestake Mining
Co., linked through its holdings in Idarado Mining Co., with
Newmont Mining Co. within the Morgan sphere of influence.
Cerro de Pasco, another of D. H. McLaughlin’s directorships,
owns a number of companies operating mining and oil proper-
ties in Peru. Newmont Mining has a substantial interest in
Cerro de Pasco.

Theodore Giles Montague, another American on Inco’s
board, is chairman of the Borden Co., a trustee of the Bank of
New York and a director of American Sugar Refining Co. All
three of these companies is within the family control of the
Rockefellers. John Fairfield Thompson also reflects U.S,
interests on the Inco board. Another trustee of the Bank of
New York, he represents the same interests on Inco’s American
distributing organisation, Whitehead Metal Products Co., and
points the link with Texas Gulf Sulphur, under Morgan and
Standard Oil (Rockefeller) domination. J. F. Thompson reveals
the African interests of these groups by his directorships on
American Metal Climax, and its British associates, Amalga-
mated Metal Corporation and Henry Gardner & Co. Ltd., who
are also connected with French tin and nickel interests. These
are some of the giant combinations involving tin, aluminium
and nickel, which are draining away the mineral resources of
Africa.

14. Union Miniére du Haut Katanga

THERE is perhaps hardly an industrial organisation in the
world that has been so widely publicised over the past five
years as Union Miniére, because of the ducks and drakes it
has played with the establishment of Congo independence and
unification. This great mining company has been since Congo’s
independence the bone of contention between the Congolese
government and the secessionist Katanga Province. Principally
owned by small shareholders, its control rested with Belgian
and British financiers.

The largest block of stock in the company, 18-14 per cent
of the 1,242,000 shares, which formerly belonged to the
Belgian colonial administration, passed at independence to the
Congolese government and was held in trust by the Belgian
government for a time, pending the settlement of political
problems. In November 1964, Moise Tshombe who had by
then returned from exile to become Congolese Prime Minister,
published a decree which had the effect of transferring control
of Union Miniére from Belgian banking and other interests to
the Congolese government without compensation. The decree
gave the Congolese government the entire portfolio of 315,675
shares in Union Miniére held by the Comité Special du
Katanga, a concession-granting concern, two-thirds of which
1s owned by the Congolese government and one-third by
Belgian interests.

The Belgian government considered that 123,725 of these
shares belonged to the Compagnie du Katanga which is an
off-shoot of the Société Générale de Belgique. The effect
of the decree was to reduce the voting strength in Union
Miniére of the Société Générale and its associate, Tanganyika
Concessions Ltd. from 40 per cent to less than 29 per cent,
while the Congolese government’s votes were raised from nearly
24 per cent to nearly 36 per cent. This meant that in any policy
dispute the Belgians would have to rally the support of small
shareholders comprising about 36 per cent.

For weeks the Belgian government and the Congolese
government talked of arranging meetings to discuss the situ-
ation. Each had a trump card. The Belgian government held
the entire portfolio in trust, while the Congolese government’s
strength lay in the expiration of Union Miniére’s lease in 1990,

On 28 January 1965, Tshombe arrived in Brussels for talks
with the Belgian Foreign Minister, M. Spaak. He asked for
the immediate handing over of the portfolio shares valued at
£120 million. These included 21 per cent of the voting rights
in Union Miniére. The Belgians, on the other hand, demanded
compensation for Belgian property damaged in the Congo
troubles, and for chartered companies who lost mineral con-
cessions under the November decree. They also insisted that
the agreement should cover the interest payable on defaulted
Congo bonds.

After days of hard bargaining, Tshombe scored what
appeared to be a great triumph. He secured the £120 million
portfolio of shares, and also received a cheque from Union
Miniére for £660,000 representing royalties and dividends on
the Congo’s 210,450 shares in Union Miniére, which gave it
24 per cent of the voting rights in the company. With this
diplomatic victory he returned to Leopoldville, his hand
strengthened to deal with the continuing political and military
problems of the country. Since then he has had cause to wonder
just how much of a victory he achieved.

In my address to the Ghana National Assembly on 22 March
1965, I gave details of the Congo situation:

‘In the five years preceding independence, the net outflow
of capital to Belgium alone was four hundred and sixty-four
million pounds.

When Lumumba assumed power, so much capital was_
taken out of the Congo that there was a national deficit of
forty million pounds.

Tshombe is now told the Congo has an external debt of
nine hundred million dollars. This is a completely arbitrary
figure—it amounts to open exploitation based on naked
colonialism. Nine hundred million dollars ($900,000,000)
is supposed to be owed to United States and Belgian
monopolies after they have raped the Congo of sums of
£2,500 million, £464 million, and £40 million. Imagine
what this would have meant to the prosperity and well-being
of the Congo.

But the tragic-comedy continues. . . . To prop up
Tshombe, the monopolies decided that of this invented
debt of $900 million, only $250 million has to be paid. How
generous, indeed!

Bonds valued in 1959 at £267 million, representing wealth
extracted from the Congo, are to be returned to the Congo
after ratification by both parliaments. But the monopolies
have decided that the value of the bonds is now only
£107 million. So the profit to these monopolies is a net
£160 million.

The monopolies further announced a fraudulent pro-
gramme to liquidate so-called Congolese external debts of
£100 million. Upon announcing this, they declare Congo is
to be responsible for a further internal debt of £200 million.

In plain words, they are depriving the Congolese people
of another £100 million. And they call this generosity!

We learn that the monopolies have declared a further
burden for the suffering people of the Congo: an internal debt
of £200 million on which the Congo must pay additional
compensation of £12-:5 million to Belgian private interests.

Beyond this, a joint Congolese-Belgian organisation has
been formed. It is withdrawing old bonds and replacing
them with forty-year issues valued at £100 million. These
will pay interest at 34 per cent per annum.

Note this: as the old bonds are worthless, the new
organisation must pay all interest on the old bonds from
1960-65 to the monopolies and EACH HOLDER OF THE
WORTHLESS OLD BONDS must be given a new bond for every
old one. In short, the organisation is a device to take more,
to enrich the monopolies further and to defraud the suffering
people of the Congo.

Tshombe has promised not to nationalise investments
valued at £150 million and to retain 8,000 Belgians in the
Congo. He has set up an Investment Bank to manage all
portfolios. The value is placed at £240 million. It is con-
trolled by Belgians.

In one year, Union Miniere’s profits were £27 million.
But although the national production in Congo increased 60
per cent between 1950 and 1957, African buying power de-
creased by 13 per cent. . . . The Congolese were taxed
280 million francs to pay for European civil servants, 440
million francs for special funds of Belgium, 1,329 million
francs for the army. They were even taxed for the Brussels
Exhibition.

Despite political independence, the Congo remains a
victim of imperialism and neo-colonialism .. . (but) the
economic and financial control of the Congo by foreign
interests is not limited to the Congo alone. The developing
countries of Africa are all subject to this unhealthy influence
in one way or another.’

If this quotation appears to contain much detail, the newly
independent peoples and their leaders have no more urgent
task today than to burn into their consciousness exactly such
detail. For it is such material that makes up the hard reality of
this world in which we are trying to live, and in which Africa
is emerging to find its place.

The full significance of the part played by Union Minieére
in Congolese affairs can only be understood if an examination
is made of the interests involved in this powerful company.
Nearly all the large enterprises engaged in exploiting the
manifold riches of the Congo come within its immediate
embrace or have indirect relations with it. They do not, how-
ever, complete the extent of the company’s engagements. Its
connections with leading insurance, financial and industrial
houses in Europe and the United States are shown in the
following list, as well as its connections with the Rhodesian
copperbelt:

Compagnie Fonciére du Katanga.

Société Générales des Forces Hydro-electriques—SOGEFOR.

Société Générale Africaine d’Electricite—SOGELEC.

Société Générale Industrielle et Chimique de Jadotville—
SOGECHIM.

Société Métallurgique du Katanga—METALKAT.

Minoteries du Katanga.

Société de Recherche Miniére du Sud-Katanga—SUDKAT.

Ciments Métallurgiques de Jadotville—C.M.]J.

Charbonnages de la Luena.

Compagnie des Chemins de Fer Katanga-Dilolo-Leopoldville
—K.D.L.

Société Africaine d’Explosifs—AFRIDEX.

Compagnie Maritime Congolaise.

Société d’Exploitation des Mines du Sud-Katanga—
MINSUDKAT.

Société d’Elevage dla Luilu ELVALUILU.

Compagnie d’Assurances d Outremer.

Société de Recherches et d’Exploitation des Bauxites du Congo
—BAUXICONGO.

Exploitation Forestiére au Kasai.

Centre d’Information du Cobalt.

Société Générale Métallurgique de Hoboken.

Société Anonyme Belge d’Exploitation de la Navigation
Aeriénne—SABENA.

Société Générale d’Enterprises Immobili¢re—S.E.].

Compagnie Belge pour I’ Industrie de l’Aluminium—COBEAL.

Foraky.

Compagnie Belge d’Assurances Maritimes—BELGAMAR.

Société Auxiliaire de la Royale Union Coloniale Belge—
S.A.R.U.C.

Wankie Colliery Co. Ltd.

Belgian-American Bank & Trust Co., New York.

Belgian-American Banking Corporation, New York.

201
 

NEO-COLONIALISM

Compagnie Générale d’Electrolyse du Palais S.A., Paris.

Trefileries et Laminoire du Havre S.A., Paris.

Société Belge pour I’ Industries Nucleaire—BELCO
NUCLEAIRE.

Tanganyika Concessions is one parent of Union Miniére du
Haut Katanga. The other was the Katanga (Belgian) Special
Committee. Union Miniére was formed between them for the
stated purpose of bringing together the interests of both
organisations in the mineral discoveries Tanganyika Con-
cessions had made under a concession granted to it by the
Committee in the Katanga province of the Congo. The con-
cession, which has until 11 March 1990 to run, covers an area
of 7,700 square miles, containing rich copper as well as zinc,
cobalt, cadmium, germanium, radium, gold, silver, iron ores
and limestone deposits. Included is a tin area of some 5,400
square miles.

Ores mined are processed at a number of plants, passing
through smelting and concentration stages. Hydro-electrical
energy is supplied from four main power plants, one of which
was installed by a subsidiary of Union Miniére, the Société
Générale des Forces Hydro-electriques. Three others belong
to Union Miniére itself. These three plants are connected to a
distribution network, part of which is devoted to supplying
electrical power to the Northern Rhodesian copperbelt at the
rate of 600 million kw. per year. Part of this network is owned
by the Société Générale Africaine d’Electricité—SOGELEC—
in which Union Miniére has a substantial interest. The com-
pany’s plants at Elizabethville, Jadotville, Kolwezi and Kpushi
consumed 75 million kw. in 1962, during which year certain
damages caused to the installations in December 1961 were
completely repaired.

Most of the concerns in which Union Miniére is interested
are supported by the Société Générale de Belgique. Many also
have connections with Anglo American Corporation either
direct or by way of Tanganyika Concessions and Union
Miniere and their subsidiaries. Société Générale has a direct
holding of 57,538 shares out of the 1,242,000 shares of no
nominal value that constitute the authorised and issued capital
of frs. 8,000,000,000 of Union Miniére. Other principal
shareholders are the Katanga Special Committee and Tangan-
yika Concessions. Royalty on the concession is paid to the
Katanga Committee by way of a sum equivalent to 10 per cent
of any dividend distributed over and above a total of
frs. 93,150,000 in any year. ‘Tanganyika Concessions, by agree-
ment with the Committee, shares in this special benefit to the
extent of 40 per cent. Originally incorporated in the Congo,
the company took its seat of administration and all its funds
to Belgium during 1960, when the Congo was achieving
independence and needed the support of those who, over the
years, had drawn such heavy tribute from it.

Société Générale’s patronage hangs closely over Union
Miniére. Attached to the Katanga Special Committee is the
Compagnie du Katanga. The Katanga Company is within the
group of the Compagnie du Congo pour le Commerce et
PIndustrie—C.C.C.I.—constituted in 1886 when Leopold II
was creating his personal empire in the Congo. It was on the
initiative of one of Leopold’s swashbucklers, Captain Thys,
that C.C.C.I., according to the chairman of the Société
Générale, became the first Belgian enterprise established in
the heart of Africa. His name is attached to the repair station
of the first railway from Matadi to Leopoldville. Thysville is
now an important link in the railway system, and C.C.C.L., in
the words of Société Générale’s chairman, has since its incep-
tion been connected directly or through its affiliates, with all
sectors of economic activity in the Congo by the creation of
transport enterprises, agricultural industries, cement works,
construction and building concerns, property companies, food
industries, as well as commercial firms. The company has,
affirmed the chairman, ‘contributed to endow the Congo with
an equipage which places the country in the first ranks of the
black African states’.

Several of these interlinked enterprises are included in the
list of Union Miniére’s interests, which frequently join those
of Société Générale. Thus Société Générale Métallurgique de
Hoboken, a company in which Société Générale owns 50,000
shares of no par value, processes certain semi-finished products
from the Union Miniére mines for the market in finished
metals of high purity and individual specification. In con-
junction with the Fansteel Metallurgical Corporation of
Chicago, Hoboken created a joint subsidiary, Fansteel-
Hoboken, in December 1962, with a capital of 360 million
francs. This new company will produce refractory metals,
notably tantalum, columbium, tungsten and molybdenun, in
various marketable forms.

Wankie Colliery Co. Ltd. represents Union Miniére’s
participation in Southern Rhodesia’s coal mines. While its
shareholding is not unimportant, Anglo American Corporation
predominates and acts as the company’s secretary and
consulting engineers. Capitalised at £6,000,000, of which
£5,277,810 is paid up, the company owns coal-mining rights
over 42,000 acres and surface rights over about 29,000 acres
of land in the Wankie district of Southern Rhodesia. The
means by which the mining interests dominate the government
of the ‘settler colonies’ are many, but the manner in which
land is given away by the administration and then leased back
from the buyers or lessees exhibits some of the most unashamed
and open gerrymandering possible. Thus Wankie Colliery
obtained on a long-term lease by agreement with the Rhodesian
government surface rights to 26,000 acres of land additional to
the above-mentioned stretches, in return for which Wankie
has graciously leased some 4,000 acres of surface rights in its
original landholdings to the government.

A directorial link, M. van Weyenbergh, associated Wankie
Colliery with Société Métallurgique du Katanga —
METALKAT—a subsidiary of Union Miniére, founded in
Belgium in 1948 in conjunction with S.A. des Mines de
Fonderies de Zinc de la Vieille-Montagne; to construct at
Kolwezi a plant capable of producing 50,000 tons of electro-
lytic zinc annually from concentrates provided by Union
Miniére’s Prince Leopold mine. The Metalkat plant produces
zinc, cadmium and refined copper. With a capital of
frs. 750,000,000 represented by 150,000 shares of no par
value, the company made a net profit of frs. 160,831,393 in
1961, after providing for various liabilities, among which

204

  

 

 
 

 

bb LYWHO
oprqzeo woruf) muse oZuoorxneg
wanponed
osiesurye yy euljoned werpeur) anbiquies0 op
anbisinyeyyl 71710g DUBEWOTA] BIOTA, vrojuogied erueduro;

     

souTuadog

   

  
  

 

 

yeYPNG

[Ararjop argue my -——

a[e19UPD) 9391005

       

 

TAINAN
NOINS!L

esuryeyy nq suseduo_

 

 

 

SUOISSIDU07) eytAURduE T,

 
 

“uIWOD jeredg esurjey

 

 

juoneiodioy uxoeuy ojsuy|

 

 

8131U

°®

W uolun

205
 

NEO-COLONIALISM ’

dividends accounted for frs. 120,000,000 (almost three-
quarters of net profit) and directors’ percentages frs. 7,857,517,

Union Minieére’s partner in Metalkat, Vieille-Montagne, is
one of the big European mining concerns producing zinc,
lead and silver. A Belgian company, founded in 1837, it has
silver-lead-zinc properties in Belgium, France, Algeria, Tunis,
Germany and Sweden and metallurgical works in Belgium,
France and Germany. Of the 405,000 shares of no par value
constituting its capital of frs. 1,000,000,000 Société Générale
owns 40,756. Its accounts for the year ended 31 December 1961 |
showed a net profit of frs. 143,287,506, after various pro-
visions, of which the largest was for re-equipment, amounting
to frs. 100,000,000. Dividends took frs. 101,250,000 and taxes
thereon frs. 27,700,000. Directors’ percentages took frs.
14,327,760. Legal reserves seem to account for considerable
sums which these large companies set aside. This item was
credited with frs. 100,000,000 in Vieille-Montagne’s 1961
accounts.

The Compagnie du Katanga, like Union Miniére, attached
to the Katanga Special Committee, joined Union Miniére in
creating in the Congo in 1932 the Société de Rocherche
Miniére du Sud-Katanga—SUDKAT. Both Compagnie du
Katanga and Union Miniére had interests in a large area
adjacent to the latter’s properties which they decided to com-
bine. With Congolese independence, control of Sudkat as well
as its funds were transferred to Belgium. Copper deposits at
Musoshi and Lubembe and zinc-lead-sulphur ore bodies at
| Kengere and Lombe owned by Sudkat were transferred to
the Société d’Exploitation des Mines du Sud-Katanga —
MINSUDKAT—formed in the Congo in June 1955, with a
capital of Congolese frs. 50,000,000.

Sudkat holds interests in the Companhia Carbonifera de
Mocambique, concerned with coal mining, as well as in
Bauxicongo and Metalkat. Metalkat created a local company
in 1962, the Société Métallurgique Katangaise, with a capital
of 600 million francs represented by 150,000 shares, to which
it transferred its Katanga installations. The zinc ingots
produced are being processed by Metalkat.

One of Sudkat’s most important investments is in Sogemines
Ltd. This company, though registered in Montreal and oper-
ating in Canada, is so intimately connected with the Société
Générale that it has on its board six of the Société’s directors,
two of whom are also on the Union Miniére directorate.
Société Générale’s investment in Sogemines covers 259,250
preferred shares of $10 each and 1,281,250 ordinary shares of
$1 each, representing over one-fifth of the Canadian company’s
issued capital. A wholly owned subsidiary, Sogemines Develop-
ment Co. Ltd., is carrying out exploration work in various
parts of Canada and holds minority interests in other mining
enterprises. Sogemines Ltd. is an investment and holding
company participating in mining, oil and industrial ventures.
L. C. and F. W. Park in The Anatomy of Big Business, graphic-
ally make the point that its ‘relationships between Canadian
and Belgian capital are based on the alliances that operate both
in Belgium or the Congo and in Canada’. (p. 157.)

Sogemines’ parent, Société Générale, devotes considerable
space in its annual report to the former’s operations. The most
important concern in which they are interested is Canadian
Petrofina Ltd. In 1961, Canadian Petrofina made the record
profit of $5,516,926. Petrofina is a Belgian oil company with
international associations, especially in the new African States,
both inside and outside the oil industry. Its connections with
Société Générale are not limited to shareholdings and direc-
torial interlocking. Associations are maintained with several
leading banks, including the Banque Belge, the Banque de
PUnion Frangais, the Credit Foncier de Belgique, the Banque
de Paris et des Pays Bas, and a number of insurance companies.

Under the impetus of Société Générale and certain associ-
ates, a subsidiary of Petrofina, Société Chimique des Derives du
Petrols—PETROCHIN—underwent a financial reorganisation
during 1962, when certain assets were passed to it, principally
by Petrofina. Société Générale used the opportunity to make 2 a
participation of 29 million francs to the company’s capital, ‘i
which several other enterprises within its group equally own
interests’. Société Générale’s shareholding i is 58,000 shares of
ho par value. Cobenam, a joint venture of Petrochim and

Union Carbide, brings together the banking interests of
Société Générale with those interested in the great American
chemical corporation, the Continental Insurance Co. and the
Hanover Bank, which is involved with Anglo American Cor-
poration and the banking consortia now engaging themselves
in ventures in the new African States. There is some Rocke-
feller influence in the Hanover Bank, and it is linked by financial
interchanges with the American Fore group of New York, a
principal fire and casualty insurance company.

Union Carbide & Carbon manufactures enriched uranium,
and through the influence of its direct backers, Hanover Bank,
and indirect associations with the Rockefeller-Mellon group,
has become the major contractor to the government-owned
atomic energy plants at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and Paducah,
Kentucky. For this purpose a separate division was formed,
Union Carbide Nuclear Company, uranium and vanadium
mines being worked in Colorado, and a tungsten mine and
mill in California. Union Carbide’s range of interests in the
chemical sphere is wide, it having a very large synthetic
materials sector. A Canadian subsidiary of Union Carbide is
Shawinigan Chemicals, which it half owns in company with
Monsanto Chemical Co. and Canadian Rosins & Chemicals
Ltd. An affiliate, B. A.-Shawinigan Ltd., is owned by British
American Oil, connected with the Bank of Montreal and
Mellon. Shawinigan Chemicals has several subsidiaries which
are equally controlled with U.S. companies. Société Générale
has its own nuclear concern, Société Belge pour |’Industrie
Nucleaire—BELGO NUCLEAIRE—in which we have noted
Union Minieére’s interest.

This is only a single short strand of the tangled web that
relates predominant banking interests in Europe and America
to industrial undertakings in Africa and other parts of the
world. It gives only the barest indication of the elastic character
of these interests.

The incursions of Société Générale into the oil world
are not confined to Petrofina and its associates. Petrobelge,
another company carrying out prospecting in the north of
Belgium in association with the Société Campincise de
Recherches et d’Exploitations Minerales, has an affiliate
operating in Venezuela, Petrobelge de Venezuela. Petrobelge
is linked with Petrofina and the Bureau de Recherches et de
Participations Miniéres Marocain in prospecting in Morocco,
the first stages of which will be completed in 1963. Italy is
another scene of Petrobelge’s activities, where in collaboration
with the Italian company, Ausonia Mineraria, and the French
organisation, Société Frangaise de Participations Petroli¢res—
PETROBAR—it is investigating hydrocarbons in the con-
cessions obtained by Ausonia. In addition, Petrobelge has
associated itself with an Italian-French-German consortium
in a venture prospecting seismic regions on the Adriatic coast.
Both Petrobelge and Petrofina have got together with the
Spanish company, Ciepsa, to prospect for hydrocarbons within
a concession owned by Ciepsa.

Direct links with Belgium’s military programme and,
accordingly, with that of NATO, are closely operated through
the Poudreries Réunies de Belgique, whose capital was in-
creased during 1962 from 203,900,000 francs to 266,700,000
francs. At the beginning of the year it absorbed the Fabrique
Nationale de Produits Chimiques et d’Explosifs at Boncelles,
Belgium, whose purchase included a participation in the
capital of S.A. d’Arendonk. The acquisition of the latter’s
selling organisation has added to the scope of the company’s
civil activities. These Belgian concerns are linked with the
Société Africaine d’Explosifs—AFRIDEX—in which Union
Miniére has interests. The military and nuclear interpenetra-
tion gives a special emphasis to the uranium output of the
Union Miniére complex, which in the post-war years upheld
the Belgian economy and helped it to refurbish its industrial
equipment. Out of the Congo came the spoils that provided
for the further exploitation of the territory and the high
productive ratio the lately devastated war-ridden and Nazi-
occupied country attained so swiftly. Even before the second
world war, uranium was already making the Shinkolobwe
mine a very important asset to Union Miniére and the Belgian
government. As one writer puts it, “The Union Miniére
achieved a certain notoriety in the ’twenties and ’thirties by
obliging would-be purchasers of radium to pay $70,000 a
gram, until competition from the Canadian Eldorado company
forced the price down to a mere $20,000 a gram, a level at
which both companies were able to make a profit’ (Anatomy
of Big Business, p. 156). According to the calculation of experts,
Union Miniere’s profits were estimated to be three billion
francs a year, $60 million in terms of American currency, and
over £20 million in sterling.

In spite of the disturbed situation in Katanga and the
protests of the company that their business had been seriously
impeded, Union Miniére’s balance sheet for the year ended
31 December 1960 showed a net profit of frs. 2,365,280,563.
Dividends absorbed no less than frs. 1,863,000,000, rather
more than half the net profits, carrying a dividend tax which
went to the Belgian government of frs. 381,578,313. Emolu-
ments to directors, auditors and staff fund (for Europeans)
absorbed frs. 84,609,333, while Permanent Committee mem-
bers received frs. 7,111,567.

Eldorado Mining & Refining Ltd. is by no means indepen-
dent of the big business and financial interests which have
Canada’s industry in their grip, and whose associations with
Africa and other less developed areas of the world are inter-
woven. A former private secretary to an ex-minister sits on its
board, which is linked with Canadian Aluminium, whose
directorate includes a former Governor-General of Canada.
As we go along we shall see how these interlockings of inter-
national finance and exalted public figures and ‘the people’s
representatatives’ create an oligarchy of power pursuing and
achieving their special interests, which have no relation what-
soever to ‘the public good’, with which they are made to appear
synonymous. We shall find that the Royal Bank of Canada,
represented on Eldorado’s board by W. J. Bennett, has con-
nections with Société Générale and Union Miniére through
interlockings via Sogemines and prominent insurance and
banking groups.

Wankie Colliery Co. Ltd., for instance, gives us M. van
Weyenbergh, a director of Union Miniére, Metalkat and
Société Générale, several of whose directorial colleagues sit
on Sogemines, whose chairman, W. H. Howard, besides being a
vice-president of the Royal Bank and chairman of the Montreal
Trust, is linked with the Rothermere newspaper group in
Great Britain and is a director of Algoma Steel Corporation
Ltd., which owns four coal mines in West Virginia and lime-
stone and dolomite deposits in Michigan State. Algoma
supplied the steel for the construction of a $20 million plant
at Sault Ste Marie, Ontario, for the Mannesman Tube Co., a
subsidiary of the Mannesman steel company, which is a
prominent member of the Ruhr industry of Western Germany.
Mannesman is said to be fast increasing its penetration into
Canadian industry. Its board includes representatives of the
Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, both of which are much
in evidence in the consortia engaged in Africa and connected.
prominently with Anglo American Corporation. Chairman of
Mannesmann since 1934 is W. Zanger, ‘a former member of
the Nazi party and of the S.S.; he was one of the group of big
German industrialists who financed the Nazi rise to power and
provided the armaments for the Nazi war machine. In the days
of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, Mannesmann opened
short-lived affiliates in Kiev and Dniepropetrovsk’ (Anatomy
of Big Business, pp. 109-110).

These are the forces that link with the South African,
Rhodesian, Congo, Angolan and Mozambique mining mag-
nates and industrialists, and we see them now entering the
development projects of many of the new African States,
hiding their identity behind government and international
agencies, whose real character is at once exposed when their
affiliations are carefully examined. They are the real directors
of neo-colonialism.

15. Economic pressures in the
Congo Republic

On 30 June 1960, when the Congo became independent, there
began what will undoubtedly be regarded by historians as the
most stormy and complex chapter in that country’s, and for
that matter Africa’s, history. Within a few weeks there was a
breakdown of law and order when soldiers of the Force
Publique, disappointed because independence did not bring
immediate improvement in their position, seized arms, arrested
white officers and N.C.O.s and finally broke up into rioting
bands. It was at this point that Moise Tshombe, with the help
of Belgian advisers, began the proceedings which led to the
secession of Katanga Province. The newly independent
Republic of the Congo was crippled by disorder and unrest.
The story of the United Nations intervention and Lumumba’s
murder are well known, and so also are the political events
which have followed. Less publicised, for obvious reasons, have
been the involved economic aspects of the whole Congo tragedy.
Yet these are in many ways the more significant and certainly
the more sinister since they are dominated by foreign interests
whose main concern has always been for their own private gain.
There was not much American investment in the Congo
before 1960. What there was, was largely indirect, through
Tanganyika Concessions and Union Miniere and the Anglo
American holdings of the Oppenheimer group, and came
mainly from the Rockefeller group. This group also had par-
ticipations in the important textile company, Filatures et
Tissages Africains, created in 1946 by the Cotton Union and
the Société Générale. The Rockefeller family holds 60,000
shares, of which 3,000 are in the hands of Nelson Rockefeller
and 26,438 belong to Laurence Rockefeller, who also has
minority interests in two other companies of the Société
Générale’s group: Cie Générale d’Automobiles et d’ Aviation
au Congo and Les Ciments du Congo. He owns about 14 per
cent of the capital of the company for the manufacture in the
Congo of metal boxes and all other articles from enamelled
sheets, and the same share in the Congo company for the pro-
duction and trade in pineapples, ANACONGO. In 1952 both
Laurence and David Rockefeller participated in acquiring
about 30 per cent of Syndicat pour |’Etude Géologique et
Miniére de la Cuvette Congolaise. All petroleum products
used in the Congo continue to be imported from abroad and
the giant Rockefeller trust, l’Esso-Standard, created a distri-
bution subsidiary in the Congo in 1956, Esso Congo Belge,
rechristened Esso Central Africa in 1960. Another subsidiary,
the Socony Vacuum Petrol Company and Texas Petroleum,
have minority participations in the Société Congolaise d’Entre
Posage des Produits de Petrole.

There are some American plywood companies there, such as
United States Plywood Corporation, with Agrifor and Korina-
congo, and in the Syndicat du Papier. Pluswood Industries
has an agreement with Cominiére, who have together formed
the Société Congolaise Belgo-Americaine pour la Transforma-
tion du Bois du Congo—-SOCOBELAM. Olin Mathieson
Industries, which have interests in the Pouderies Réunies de
Belgique, have participated with Union Miniére and several
other groups of the Société Générale in creating the Société
Africaine d’Explosifs—AFRIDEX. Olin Mathieson have a fifth
of the capital. Others investing there include the Industrial and
Investing Corporation, New York, Armco Steel, Bell Tele-
phone, General Motors and Otis Elevators.

Since 1960 the Bank of America has acquired 20 per cent in
the Lambert Bank group’s Socobanque; Ford has founded
Ford Motors (Congo); Union Carbide has taken a dominant
Participation in Somilu, created in 1960 to exploit a pyrochlore
mine. This mineral contains niobium, a rare metal used in
making special steels. David Rockefeller made a tour to the
Congo in 1959, for ‘information’, after which his group took up
1,030 out of 26,000 shares in Société de Recherches et
d’Exploitation de Bauxites au Congo—BAUXICONGO. In
June 1960 he announced that he would take up about eight per
cent of the 65 millions of capital in the Cie du Congo pour le
Commerce et |’Industrie and C.C.C.I. Dillon Read & Co. and
J. H. Whitney & Co., bankers of New York, have created an
investment company to examine the possibilities of American
investment in the Congo. This is the American Eurafrican
Fund.

Interesting as this American penetration into the Congo is,
of more immediate concern is the continuing Belgian domina-
tion of so much of the Congo’s economy. In Les Trusts au Congo
by Pierre Joye and Rosine Lewin, a clear picture of the events
immediately preceding and following independence is given.

According to their account, the independent State of the
Congo, under Leopold II, owned a large part of the capital of
the original companies, also of the ‘chartered companies’
created at the time, and of private enterprises. After the Belgian
Government took over the administration of the Congo, these
participations were increased in a number of ways: by direct
intervention in the creation of new organisms of a ‘para-statal’
nature; by the arrogation of certain rights as recompense for the
concessions they gave; by exercise of right to subscribe to the
increase of the capital of companies in which the Congo State
already owned shares.

Asa result the Belgian Congo held a considerable portfolio of
investments which, at the most moderate estimate, were valued
at about 40 million francs. In addition it possessed various
prerogatives, such as voting rights and the right to nominate
representatives to administrative boards, in a whole series of
enterprises in which it did not hold capital participations. This
portfolio comprised participations and rights in:

1 Enterprises of a ‘para-statal’ character, such as the Banque
Centrale du Congo Belge; the Société de Credit au Colonat;

214

 
 

ECONOMIC PRESSURES IN THE CONGO REPUBLIC

the Caisse d’Epargne du Congo Belge; the Offices des Cites
Africaines O.C.A., OTRACO; the Regie de Distribution
d’Eau et d’Electricité Regideso, etc.

2 The chartered companies: Comité Special du Katanga

(C.S.K.) Comité National du Kivu (C.N.Ki.); Cie des

Chemins de Fer des Grands Lacs.

Investment companies like Unatra; Cie du Katanga, etc.

Mining companies like Forminitre; Mines d’or de Kilo-

Moto, etc.

5 Transport enterprises like Cicicongo; Transport en
Commun de Leopoldville-Chemin de Fer K.D.L.; Sabena,
etc.

6 Production and distribution; undertakings like electrical
power, such as Forces de l'Est and Forces du Bas-Congo.

7 Private enterprises in which the Congo held only minority
interests.

we GO

The possession of this important portfolio permitted the
public authorities, in principle, to exercise a considerable
influence in the Congo economy and even to control com-
pletely certain important sectors. Moreover, official statements
justified these participations, declaring that they allowed the
State to exercise its role of ‘guardian of the public interest and
tutor of the natives’.

The example of the C.S.K. is significant in this respect.
Leopold II had controlled this semi-public organism by
reserving to the State the right to nominate four out of the six
members of its administration. But after the taking over of the
Congo by Belgium the C.S.K. was, during fifty years, the docile
instrument of the Union Miniére, although it had every oppor-
tunity to control the great Katanga trust. C.S.K. was by far the
biggest shareholder of Union Miniére, and the statutes elabor-
ated in 1906 officially conferred on it important rights in Union
Miniére, notably that of designating the administrative council
and a certain number of directors. C.S.K. never used these
tights, but on the contrary confided its representation to the
most obvious leaders of private capital. The hold of the trusts
on the Congo administration was total, the more so since the
big companies were able to ensure considerable material
advantages to the representatives of the State who passed into
their service.

Before June 1960 the trusts speeded upthetr manoeuvres to
prevent the Congolese people from coming into possession of
their patrimony. At the time of the Round Table Conference,
the financial press was emphatically insisting on the Belgian
government obtaining guarantees from the future Congo
Republic. ‘In the very first place, it is necessary to shelter the
enterprises from eventual nationalisation.’ The Congolese
nationalist parties were, however, unanimous in opposing the
maintenance by the Belgian financial groups of an economic
protectorate over the Congo after 30 June 1960.

Consequently, they insisted that the Congo portfolio should
be transferred integrally and without conditions to the young
Republic, which would be able to make use of the rights arising
from it to name its own representatives on the ‘para-statal’
organisms and, if such should be the case, in the private
Congolese companies. It was this which frightened Belgian
financial circles; the prospect of seeing the Congo Republic
making use of the incontestable rights that the possession of the
Congolese portfolio would confer upon it.

To avert this, Raymond Scheyven vainly tried the manoeuvre
which was quickly recognised by the Congolese leaders: he
proposed to answer the financial needs of the Congo by creating
a ‘mixed investment company’, to which the Congo would
confer the management of its portfolio, Belgium on its side
bringing an annual contribution of one billion francs. If this
attempt failed, the Belgian government was all the happier in
the case of the chartered companies, whose dissolution im
extremis it would decree a few days before 30 June. It also
decided to dissolve C.S.K. and C.N.Ki. before Congo acceded
to independence.

On the occasion of the Round Table Conference, Scheyven
parleyed with certain Congolese delegates, whom he tried to
persuade that it would be better if the Belgian government
itself proceeded with this measure before 30 June. He made
them believe that it was preferable because, if the Congolese
government did it afterwards, this could create a bad impression
abroad, giving rise to the belief that they had something against
the private companies.

The manoeuvre was clever. It was easier to convince the
Congolese delegates, since most of them showed an under-
standable distrust towards the chartered companies. They had
only too often had occasion to declare that the companies
played the game of the big trusts. As to these, certain Congolese
parties had called for the dissolution of the companies and the
transfer of their rights to the Congolese State.

The Belgian officials charged with giving technical enlighten-
ment to the participants at the Round Table Conference were
openly careful to indicate that the Congo Republic could repay
the colonialists for their part, by using in the interests of the
Congolese people the prerogatives in the companies which
would devolve upon the State.

A hurried decree of 27 June 1960, three days before the
proclamation of independence, sanctioned the dissolution of the
C.S.K. and the division of its assets between the Congo and
the Cie du Katanga. At a stroke the Congo Republic lost the
possibility of utilising the powerful instruments of command
which it would have disposed of in taking over the direction of
the C.S.K. and the prerogatives of the Union Miniére were
preserved.

Through the intermediary C.S.K., which would have in
fact become a Congolese para-statal organism, the Congo
Republic would in effect have obtained the statutory right to
designate the president of the Katanga trust and a certain
number of other directors on its board. And the Congolese
government could even have pre-empted its views in the
general meetings of the Union Miniére, through the C.S.K.,
which was the biggest shareholder of the company.

The dissolution of the C.S.K. not only lost to the Congo
Republic the possibility of benefiting from the prerogatives of
this organism. The convention of 27 June 1960 accorded con-
siderable additional advantages to the Cie du Katanga, which
received full ownership of a third of the lands improved by the
C.S.K. (allotment zones), its real estate and bankings, as well as
the right to a third of the rents which were expected in the
future from the mineral concessions allocated by C.S.K.

If the ground rights and mineral rights not already conceded
revert to the Congo, this restitution of rights over the Congolese
land and mineral patrimony will not be effected without
compensation, since the convention stipulates that the Congo
Republic must pay in compensation a forfeiture indemnity of
100 million to the Cie du Katanga.

The C.N.Ki. was formed for a period which will expire on
31 December 2011. Here again, it would have been sufficient if
the Congolese government utilised the rights conferred on it by
statute to exercise a preponderant influence in this ‘para-state’
organism. The Belgian authorities, however, concluded with
the officials of the C.N.Ki. a convention which decided that the
Belgian Congo would withdraw purely and simply as a con-
cession partner and renounce at the same time all its rights in
the association.

A decree issued on 30 May 1960 approved this convention
and, by a stroke, C.N.Ki. ceased to be a semi-official organism.
On 21 June 1960 its shareholders decided, in addition, to
transform it into a common stock company called the Société
Belgo-Africaine du Kivu—SOBAKI. This company reserved
the right to exploit for its own private profit exclusively the
mines of C.N.Ki. as well as the integral property of the portfolio
which this organism had constituted. If the public authorities
take over the administration of the crown lands, the convention
provides that the shareholders of Sobaki shall receive in
compensation ‘a just indemnity’.

To give an appearance of legality to these conventions, the
representatives of the Belgian government declared that they
acted ‘in accordance with the wishes expressed by the eco-
nomic, financial and social conference which took place in
Brussels in the months of April and May 1960’. In reality, in
pronouncing the dissolution of the C.S.K. and the C.N.Ki. the
Belgian authorities wanted, above all, to place before the new
Congolese State an accomplished fact.

In order to show how indispensable the financial support
of Belgium was, the Belgian companies had, in fact, taken care
to make massive withdrawals of capital at the same time as they
pushed to the maximum the export of Congolese products, and
on the other hand, limited to the extreme their imports. The
Congolese trade balance resulting from the action gave an
exceptionally high surplus in 1959 (13,417 million francs),
which did nothing to save the Congo from very great financial
difficulties. In fact, a heavy proportion of the sums anticipated
from the sale of Congolese products were not returned to the
colony, and more than seven billions of private capital left the
Congo in the course of the exercise.

These manoeuvres have cost the young African State sad
convulsions and have brought it to the edge of chaos. And they
have done nothing to resolve the essential problem for the
future of the Congo: how to recover from under-development.

16. Monetary zones and foreign
banks

THE U.N. Economic Commission for Africa’s Standing Com-
mittee for Trade has recently described the African continent
as ‘riddled with different trade regimes and payments systems
supplemented in most cases by specific economic ties with
countries or groupings of countries outside Africa’.* One of the
most effective ways in which Britain and France have retained
economic ties with former colonial territories is through action
to ensure that the new States remained in the monetary zones
centred on London and Paris.

‘There are seven major currency groups in Africa, the French
franc zone, the sterling area, the Belgian franc area, the Spanish
peseta and the Portuguese escudo areas, the South African
rand area, and the countries like the United Arab Republic and
the Congo (Leopoldville), with separate currency units. By far
the greater part of Africa’s trade comes within the sterling area
and the French franc zones of Africa.

The sterling area has been somewhat looser than the franc
bloc. For example, Nigeria and Ghana have established their
own currencies and their own central banks, though they con-
tinue for the most part to keep their international reserves in
the form of sterling. When I opened the Bank of Ghana at the
end of July 1959, I spoke of the decisive part played by a
central bank in the economic life of a country: ‘Our political
independence will be meaningless unless we use it so as to

* Background Paper on the Establishment of an African Common Market,
13 October 1963.

obtain economic and financial self government and independ-
ence. In order to obtain this it is of absolute and paramount
importance that a central bank should be set up by the Govern-
ment.’ In setting up the Bank of Ghana we obtained assistance
from the Bank of England, but our bank has always followed a
policy designed to secure our economic independence and to
foster the general development of the country. The Bank of
Ghana, like other banks, set up in a similar way, has no claim
on foreign exchange reserves of England, but has complete
control over its own foreign exchange earnings.

The East African Currency Board is the main multinational
monetary institution in the sterling area. It embraces Kenya,
Tanzania* and Uganda in Africa, and Aden outside the region,
with a currency freely convertible at a fixed rate to the pound
sterling. The member countries of the Currency Board have no
control over domestic money supplies. In the long run these are
controlled by export and import levels and foreign investment
flows, and in the short, by lending policies of the London
banks. Under this arrangement nationally directed growth often
leads to a shortage of currency which hinders expansion.

In Britain the names of the ‘Big Five’ banks are household
words. These banks with their immense resources are closely
linked with big industrialists to form a small and specially
powerful group with world-wide interests. In 1951 the 147
directors of the Big Five banks held between them 1,008
directorships of which 299 were in other financial institutions
such as other banks, insurance companies and investment
trusts. Many of the biggest companies have directors on the
boards of more than one of the big banks. “The more the inter-
locking takes place, the less one can say “‘this one is a financier,
and that one is an industrialist’. There emerges a group of
finance capitalists dominating both finance and industry.’ f

The dangers, therefore, of too close ties with foreign banks
are apparent. Yet the large participations of foreign banks in
African banks may be seen from the following:

* Tanzania has announced plans for its own currency.
+ Monopoly: A Study of British Monopoly Capitalism by Sam Aaronovitch,
p. 54.

Republic of Congo: Crédit Congolais is a subsidiary of Barclay’s Bank
D.C.O. through its affiliate in Antwerp, the Banque de Commerce;
Banque Internationale pour le Commerce et I’Industrie du Congo
is a subsidiary of B.N.C.I., Paris, through B.N.C.I. (Afrique); Banque
Commerciale Congolaise is a subsidiary of Crédit Lyonnais; Société
Générale de Banques au Congo is made up of Bayerische Vereins-
bank (5%), Société Générale de Paris (51%), Banco Nazionale del
Lavoro, Banque de I’Union Parisienne and Bankers International
Corporation (Morgan Guaranty).

Congo (Leopoldville): Banque Internationale pour le Commerce is a
subsidiary of B.N.C.I.; Société Congolaise de Banque is also a sub-
sidiary of B.N.C.I.; Banque Belge d’Afrique (Banque de Bruxelles
and Brufina); Banque Centrale du Congo Belge et du Ruanda-Urundi
(Société Générale de Belgique); Banque du Congo Belge (Société
Générale de Belgique and Compagnie du Congo pour le Commerce et
l'Industrie); Banque Belgo-Congolaise (Société Générale de Belgique
and C.C.C.I.).

Cameroun: Société Camerounaise de Banque (Deutsche Bank (5%)
and Crédit Lyonnais); Banque Internationale pour le Commerce et :
P Industrie (B.I.C.I. du Cameroun is a subsidiary of B.N.C.I.);
Société Générale de Banques en Cameroun is made up of Bayerische
Vereinsbank (5%), Société Générale de Paris (51%), Banque de |
Union Parisienne, Banco Nazionale del Lavoro, and Bankers
International Corporation (Morgan Guaranty).

Gabon: Union Gabonaise de Banque (Deutsche Bank (10%) and
Credit Lyonnais).

Liberia: Bank of Monrovia is owned 100 per cent by First National
City Bank of New York (Morgan); Liberian Trading & Development
Bank [Mediobanca (60%) and Bankers International Corporation
(Morgan)].

Libya: The Sahara Bank (Tripoli) [Bank of America International }
N.Y., Bank of America, California, Banco de Sicilia, Palerno (Bank i
of America Associate)].

Central Africa: Union Bancaire en Afrique Centrale is owned by
Société Générale de Paris and Crédit Lyonnais.

222

 
 

MONETARY ZONES AND FOREIGN BANKS

Nigeria: Barclays Bank D.C.O.; Bank of West Africa; Philip Hill
(Nigeria) Ltd. is made up of Philip Hill (40%), Banca Commerciale
Italiana (30%), and Crédit Lyonnais (30%); United Bank for Africa
[B.N.C.I., Rotterdamsche Bank, Banco Nazionale del Lavoro, and
Bankers Trust Corporation (Morgan)]; Nigerian Industrial Develop-
ment Bank (Chase International Corporation, Bank of America,
Northwest International Bank, Irving International Finance Cor-
poration, Bank of Tokyo, Instituto Mobiliare Italiano and Commerz-
bank have together taken up shares to the value of £480,000; Société
Financiére pour les Pays d’Outremer is made up of International
Finance Corporation (£490,000), Bank of Nigeria (£490,000),
Nigerian private investors (£20,000) and the Investment Company
of Nigeria (£500,000). A government loan brings total funds up to
£44 million.

Ruanda Burundi: Banque de Ruanda Urundi is a subsidiary of
B.N.C.I.

Sudan: Nilein Bank (Banque des Deux Nils) is a subsidiary of Crédit
Lyonnais.

Ivory Coast: Société Générale de Banques en Céte d’Ivoire is made
up of Bayerische Vereinsbank, Société Générale de Paris, Banque de
l'Union Parisienne, Banco Nazionale del Lavoro, and Bankers
International Corporation (Morgan Guaranty); Banque Ivoirienne
de Crédit is a subsidiary of Crédit Lyonnais; B.I.C.I. du Céte d'Ivoire
is a subsidiary of B.N.C.I. and Société Ivoirienne de Banque is made
up of Deutsche Bank (16%), Crédit Lyonnais (42%), International
Banking Corporation (16%), Banca Commerciale Italiana (16%),
and Ivory Coast Government (10%).

Dahomey: Société Dahomienne de Banque is a subsidiary of Crédit
Lyonnais.

Mali: Banque Malienne de Crédit et de Dépéts is a subsidiary of
Crédit Lyonnais.

Morocco: Banque Franco-Suisse pour le Maroc is made up of Swiss
Bank Corporation (50%) and Crédit Commercial de France (50%);
Banque Nationale pour le Developpement Economique is made up
of Deutsche Bank, Banco Nazionale del Lavoro, and Commerzbank;
Caisse Marocaine des Marchés is part-owned by Crédit Foncier de
France; Banque Fongiére du Maroc is part owned by Crédit du
Nord; Banque Commerciale du Maroc is made up of Cie Industrielle
et Commercial (C.I.C.), Credit Lyonnais du Maroc, Union Africaine
et Financiére Maroc, and Union Européenne Industrielle et
Financiére.

Tchad: Banque Tchadienne de Crédit et de Dépéts (Government of
Tchad and Crédit Lyonnais).

Tunisia: Union Bancaire pour le Commerce et I’Industrie (B.N.C.I.
and Banco di Roma); Banque de Tunisie (C.I.C.); Union Inter-
nationale de Banque (Société Tunisienne de Banques, Banca Com-
merciale Italiana, Commerzbank, and Bank of America); Banque
d’Escompte et de Crédit 4 l’ Industrie en Tunisie (B.E.I.T.) is made
up of Banque Industrielle pour l'Afrique du Nord (Banque de
l'Indochine, 5%), International Banking Corporation (Morgan
Guaranty), and Comptoir National d’Escompte de Paris.

Madagascar: Banque Malgache d’Escompte et de Crédit (Malagasy
Government and Comptoir National d’Escompte de Paris).

South Africa: In addition to Barclays D.C.O., Crédit Lyonnais, and
other big U.K. and French banks, there are French Bank of South
Africa (Banque de |’Indochine), First National City Bank of New
York (S.A.) Ltd., Banque Commerciale Africaine (C.LC., 12,631
shares) and the Standard Bank.

In addition, there are a number of other banks functioning
throughout Africa, such as the British Bank of the Middle East,
which operates in Tunisia and Morocco and Libya, and
National and Grindlays Bank, with branches and agencies in
the Somali Republic. A recently established bank is the Mer-
chant Bank of Central Africa, which is a creation of the
Rothschild Banking group. The Banque Lambert has a par-
ticipation as well as Mediobanca.

Reports of important French banks for their financial year
1963-4 indicate the way in which they are adapting themselves
to the new conditions of independent States without losing any
of their former influence. The following report of the Comptoir
National d’Escompte de Paris appeared in Le Monde, 16 June
1964:

“We have asserted in a new form our policy in Africa. We
opened in April, as we indicated last year, the Banque
d’Escompte et de Crédit 4 l’Industrie en Tunisie (B.E.I.T.)
which we have founded in Tunis with the Banque Industrielle
de l'Afrique du Nord (B.1.A.N.) and the Morgan Guaranty
International Banking Corporation; this new establishment
has taken over our local branches and those of the B.I.A.N.
We also decided to create, with the Malagasy Government,
the Banque Malgache d’Escompte et de Crédit (B.A.M.E.S.)
to which we have since ceded our agencies in Madagascar,
and which is presided over by a Malagasy personality,
administered by a joint board and managed by our repre-
sentative. We hope to give to this traditional sector of
our influence a new drive and to emphasise thereby the
position which we have held in Madagascar since 1885. In
Algeria we are retaining only an agency in Algiers, where
in spite of the circumstances we have maintained some
activity.’

Three days earlier, on 13 June 1964, Le Monde contained a
report of the activities of Credit Lyonnais:

“In Morocco we have during the month of February 1963,
with the help of the Banque Marocaine du Commerce
Extérieur, proceeded to transform our agencies into a
company under Moroccan law. The B.M.C.E.E. has taken
up an important participation in the registered capital of six
million dirhams of the new company, which functions under
the registered title of Crédit Lyonnais-Maroc.

In Tunisia, where our agencies have obtained satisfactory
results, the conversations taken up with the Société
Tunisienne de Banque, the Banca Commerciale Italiana,
the Commerzbank A.G. and the Bank of America have ended
in the creation of the Union Internationale de Banques, with
a capital of 700,000 dinars, which has taken over with effect
from 2 January 1964 the working of our agencies.

With the association of the Republic of Chad there was
created in February 1963 the Banque Tchadienne de Crédit
et de Dépdts, with a capital of 100 million francs CFA,
These two participations help to complete our representation
in black Africa, where our establishment is now interested in
eleven banking companies.’

The French have maintained close monetary ties with the
countries of former French West Africa and French Equatorial
Africa. The Banque Centrale des Etats de |’Afrique de l'Ouest
(B.C.E.A.O.) controls the currencies of Mauritania, Senegal,
Ivory Coast, Upper Volta, Dahomey and Niger. The currency
issued by the bank is still called the CFA franc, but now,
instead of ‘Colonies Francaises d’Afrique’, the initials mean
‘Communauté Financiére Africaine’. National monetary com-
missions have been set up in the various States, and there is a
limited degree of African representation on the administrative
council.

The same does not apply to the Banque Centrale des
Etats de l'Afrique Equatoriale et du Cameroun (B.C.E.A.C.)
which is concerned with the Congo (Brazzaville), Gabon, the
Central African Republic, Chad and Cameroun. The national
monetary commissions have the same powers as those in
former French West Africa, but central bank administrators
sit on them, and the administrative council is composed of
Frenchmen.

As a research group of the Department of Economics in the
University of Ghana has pointed out, ‘the most significant
feature of these currency blocs is that the foreign exchange
reserves of the franc zone countries are still pooled in France
itself. They are estimated individually for each member, but
cannot be drawn upon beyond a certain margin of credit
governed in each case by a bilateral agreement with the French
government. Local monetary policy, exchange control and duty
policy . . . must operate within the framework of this central
allocation by the French.’

Certain former French colonies, Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria,
Mali and Guinea have, since independence, established their
own banks and currencies, but they have pegged their
currencies to the franc.

The existence of separate monetary zones is having a harmful
effect on the growth of trade in Africa. It is leading to illegal
trade and revenue losses in many countries and makes an
African Common Market difficult. Like the old, artificial
political boundaries which are a relic of the colonial period, the
various monetary zones help to emphasise differences when the
independent African States should all be working for unified
economic development. They perpetuate links with former
colonial powers and strengthen the forces of neo-colonialism.

A significant step forward in continental economic co-
operation was taken in September 1964, when the African
Development Bank was founded. Its headquarters are at
Abidjan, Ivory Coast, and its membership is limited to
independent African governments. All powers of the Bank
rest in the Board of Governors, each Governor being a
representative of a member state. The aim of the Bank is to
accelerate the economic development and social progress of its
member countries, and to accomplish this, the Bank is author-
ised to promote the investment of public and private capital
in Africa.

While foreign private investment must be encouraged, it
must be carefully regulated so that it is directed to important
growth sectors without leaving control of such sectors in
foreign hands. Here again, we see the need for unified plan-
ning. With the support of a Union government and a
continental code to govern foreign investment the African
Development Bank would be able to accelerate the stimulus
it is already giving to the economic development of the
continent.

17. New industries: the effects on
primary producing countries

THE second world war, fought as it was on an almost global
scale, called for scientific and inventive genius in unprecedented
measure, all towards one end: that of destruction. The need
for vast quantities of equipment and the supply services that
were ancillary to the purpose of wiping out people and cities,
animated, as peace never did, governmental support for investi-
gation and research into faster and more rational means of mass
production. The United States, which became the prime
arsenal and provider for its Western allies, was naturally fore-
most in adjusting its industrial machinery to the new methods
at the close of the war. Since then the demands made by the
reconstruction of ruined cities and the rebuilding of disjointed
economies have accelerated the trend. The policy of contain-
ment, military adventures such as Vietnam, Cyprus and Korea,
cold war stock-piling and the race in rocket assembly and
space-ship building have added their quota. Automation and
the use of electronics are fast spreading and, as in America,
taking hold wherever large-scale production finds it more
profitable to replace human labour by push-button thinly-
manned mechanisms.

The resulting tremendous bound forward in productive
potential has created an increasing demand for the base
materials of industry, and there has sprung up a rapidly
enlarging assortment of synthetic raw materials, many of them
supplementing natural products and often replacing them.
This is having an effect upon the market prices of natural
primary products, a fact given prominence by the chairman of
Union Miniere du Haut Katanga at the 1964 shareholders’
meeting. The London Metal Exchange, the body which still
operates the world prices of metals, is largely under the
influence of the leading producers and processors like Union
Miniére itself, and its associates Rhodesian Selection Trust,
Conzinc-Rio Tinto, Amalgamated Metal Corporation, Minerais
et Metaux and London Tin Corporation.

Cocoa users, for their part, are constantly threatening the
producing countries that they will use synthetic substitutes and
rubber-growing countries are up against the increasing use of
the artificial product. Just as the high quotations and fluctua-
tions of primary products are influenced by the monopoly
producers, so the threat of the use of synthetics is no idle
warning, since the controllers of the natural products are also
the major producers of the artificial materials. For the same
reason, the producers of synthetics will be careful not to com-
pete too vigorously with the natural products. For example, it
has been alleged that Dunlop were slow to begin synthetic
rubber manufacturing because of their large plantation interests
in Malaya.

All four of the American rubber-producing giants, Firestone,
B. F. Goodrich, Goodyear and United States Rubber, are
engaged in the production of artificial rubber. United States
Rubber works 90,000 acres of rubber plantations in Malaya and
Indonesia, as well as concessions in Brazil, Venezuela, Colombia
and other Latin American countries. Its synthetic rubber and
related plants, with the exception of that at Naugatuck, Con-
necticut, are placed, like those of its textile division, in the
southern States of America, where labour is cheaper than in the
north. In 1962 there was ‘significant expansion’ of the com-
pany’s plastics facilities, under which the production capacity
of its ‘Kralastic’ material was increased. This is described as a
‘tough plastic-rubber blend’, for which growing uses are being
found in automobiles and various appliances, all formerly using
rubber.

Goodyear, among the first twenty companies in the United
States, has its own rubber plantations in Indonesia, Costa Rica,
Brazil and Guatemala. It operates synthetic rubber plants at
Houston, Texas and Akron, Ohio. A 30 per cent increase was
made in the company’s facilities for research in rubber, plastics
and other scientific exploration in 1961, for the company has
become interested in chemicals and aeronautics.

Firestone is a byword in West Africa where, until the recent
advent of iron-ore exploiting companies, it dominated the
economy of Liberia. It is still ‘King of Rubber’ there and, like
other rubber giants, gets its rubber also from plantations in the
Latin American countries, as well as Ceylon. It has fifty-eight
plants throughout the United States, including four for syn-
thetic rubber and one working on what is described as ‘U.S.
national defence’. Another fifty-three plants are spread around
the world, principally in the western hemisphere.

B. F. Goodrich Company runs to the same form but, if
anything, has wider plastics interests, since it is a producer of
vinyl resins under the trade mark Geon, and among a long list
of subsidiaries and other holdings controls British Geon, in
collaboration with the Distillers Company, a combine control-
ling the whisky and gin trade of Great Britain, with over a
hundred subsidiary companies engaged in biochemicals, in-
dustrial alcohol, plastics, magnesium alloys for jet engines, and
many other operations. BTR Industries, which controls among
other companies British Tyre & Rubber Company and the
International Synthetic Rubber Company, is included in
Goodrich’s affiliates. Rubber plantations worked by the Good-
rich Company are to be found in Liberia as well as in Latin
America and Malaya. This company is tied up with A.K.U.
(Algemene Kunstzijde Unie) of Holland, in a company that
manufactures synthetic rubber for special purposes, and con-
trols the important French rubber manufacturers, Kleber-
Colombes. Like Firestone and United States Rubber, it also
has companies in Japan.

These and the other main international rubber companies,
such as the Italian Pirelli, the German companies, Continental
and Phoenix, the French Michelin and Kleger-Colombes, and
the British Dunlop, more or less complete the small circle of
trusts that dominate the world’s production of rubber. They
are all engaged in artificial rubber-making and the manufacture
of other synthetics. The furious advertising that goes on in
every country of the world to push their individual products
leaves no doubt about their keen competition for markets, and
all of them have factories as well as a multitude of agents and
representatives spread across the globe.

This brief review of the rubber monopolies illustrates their
inter-relations and their domination of both natural and syn-
thetic rubber throughout the world. It becomes increasingly
obvious as we delve deeper into the operations of the industrial
monopolies that they have the developing countries at a
complete disadvantage.

As providers of novel basic products for old and new indus-
tries on a continually extending scale, the highly industrialised
countries are the major investors in and concessionaires for the
starting materials that are obtained primarily from largely sub-
industrialised sources. Among these we include Australia and
the more advanced Canada, which are, for all practical purposes,
financial colonies of American-dominated Western capital.

Because of the extremely high capital costs involved in dis-
covering and bringing to perfection new products and their
uses and in establishing plants and factories for their manu-
facture and processing, the production of these synthetic
materials has become the monopoly of a few mammoth
international organisations like Imperial Chemical Industries
(I.C.I.), Du Pont de Nemours, Union Carbide, Courtaulds,
Snia Viscosa, Montecatini, A.K.U., Unilever, the tripartite
group of the former I. G. Farben—Bayer, Hoechst and B.A.S.F.
~—Dow Chemical, Texas Gulf Sulphur, Lonza and Seichime.
The important Japanese offspring of the Mitsui complex, Toyo
Rayon Company, is linked to the major American and European
giants, Du Pont, I.C.I. and Montecatini by patent arrangements,
Du Pont having taken a direct interest in the company during
the American occupation of Japan immediately after the war.
These giants join forces at certain focal points in the struggle
for domination. All the time they carry on a ferocious competi-
tion to secure monopoly markets and original source material
supplies, not only for synthetics production but for the metal-
lurgical, electronics and nuclear industries that have become
part and parcel of their post-war expansion. It is not surprising
therefore that even a cursory glance at their interests should
reveal involvement in African raw materials’ exploitation, even
though their financial shufflings may appear superficially to be
very far away from such engagements.

When Courtauld’s merger with I.C.I. was mooted in 1961 it
had ‘world-wide repercussions’, which is not surprising when
its own ramifications are reviewed and I.C.I.’s weight in the
industrial and commercial markets of the world is recognised.
Representing over 30 per cent of the British chemical industry,
I.C.J. does 88 per cent of its turnover overseas in some fifty
countries. Its issued capital is several times larger than the
budget of most African States, standing at the end of 1962 at
£303,393,910, larger even than that of South Africa, the conti-
nent’s most industrialised country. From chemicals, dyestuffs,
paints, pharmaceuticals, fibres, plastics, heavy organic chemi-
cals, explosives and fertilisers this vast organisation created a
new holding company in 1962, Imperial Metal Industries Ltd.,
in order, so runs the company’s literature, to achieve a greater
concentration of effort on a side of the company’s business
which is materially different from its main chemical manu-
facturing activities: namely, its non-ferrous metal interests
other than aluminium. In the latter field I.C.I. is linked on a
fifty-fifty basis in Imperial Aluminium with Alcoa (Aluminium
Company of America), the empire of the Mellon interests.

Imperial Metal Industries has an interest in Extended Surface
Tube Company. So has Stewarts & Lloyds, a £60 million
company working basic and foundry pig iron up to tubes of all
varieties. Through subsidiaries, associated companies and
agents throughout the world, Stewarts & Lloyds has a stake in
all the international markets. Among these are a 70 per cent
interest in Stewarts & Lloyds of South Africa Ltd., which
controls six companies operating in South-West Africa, Rho-
desia and South Africa itself; and a 13 per cent holding in the
major steel conversion project in Zambia, the Rhodesian Iron &
Steel Company, a subsidiary of Rhodesian Anglo American
Ltd., which is controlled by Anglo American of South Africa.
Stewarts & Lloyds have come up against American monopoly
competition in South Africa, where their subsidiary had been
negotiating for some months with United States and so-called
Brazilian groups for establishing a plant beside its existing one
at Vereeniging, near Johannesburg. The Americans and their
Brazilian vassals were trying to jump the gun by enforcing a
clause which would reduce the Stewarts & Lloyds participation
from 51 per cent to 25 per cent in the event that the steel
industry in the United Kingdom becomes nationalised or, in
the opinion of the two outside partners, is likely to be
nationalised.

I.C.I. is assisting the South African Government in building
up its chemical and armaments industries through I.C.I.
(South Africa) Ltd. and African Explosives & Chemical Indus-
tries, in which it partners De Beers. African Explosives will be
supplying from its constructing complex at Sasolburg many of
the materials for providing polymers to the nylon spinning
plant which is being erected by British Nylon Spinners at a cost
of £3 million on the site purchased by it in 1963 at Belville,
near Cape Town. The Rhodesian subsidiary of African
Explosives is behind the proposed £2 million fertiliser plant to
be built at Livingstone, Zambia, with the backing of the
government, in connection with which the company is con-
structing another plant at Dorowa, Rhodesia, for the exploita-
tion of phosphate deposits.

Consumption of fuel and power and common minerals has
jumped phenomenally since the war and the western capitalist
countries as well as Japan have resorted to non-industrialised
countries for quickly growing quantities. Before the war the
industrialised countries relied largely upon their own reserves
of iron ores or on those of other Western sources. Today the
giant iron and steel corporations of Europe, America and Japan,
in addition to their investments in Canada and Australia, are
turning more and more for their base materials to Africa, where
cheap labour, tax concessions and supporting government
policies have opened up avenues of richer profits from huge,
untapped resources. M. D. Banghart, vice-president of New-
mont Mining, a leading American holding company with semi-
permanent investments in mining and crude oil, has said that
American firms could make a greater profit in Africa than from
any comparable investment in the United States. Mr Banghart
should know intimately what he is talking about, since New-
mont Mining is joined in consortia operating the biggest
exploitative undertakings in northern and southern Africa, such
as the O’Okiep Copper Co., the Tsumeb Corporation, Palabora
Mining, Soc. N.A. du Plomb and Soc. des Mines de Zellidja, —;
It has a 12:1 per cent participation in Cyprus Mines, which
gives it a vested interest in maintaining Cyprus for the NATO
cause. The fact that United States miners earn an average of —
$2.70 an hour against the less than 10 cents average paid to |
African miners in South Africa makes it obvious how such _— ;
super-profits are achieved. No wonder Newmont’s original
investment in Tsumeb multiplied twenty times in value in the
space of three years.

The African countries are faced with the need to turn sub-
sistence economies into organisms that will generate viable and
improved. conditions of living for their populations. However,
many African governments, instead of getting together in
united action which would stimulate maximum capital accumu-
lation and the construction of a solid over-all African economy,
are granting concessions for the working of mineral, agricultural
and forestry resources whose purpose is the drawing off of
output to sustain and enlarge the industries and economies of
the imperialist countries. Not one of the investing syndicates
has any intention of founding in any one of these countries an
integrated industrial complex that would give impetus to
genuine economic growth. Nor are the returns on the export of
primary products from mining, agriculture and forestry likely
to provide to any important extent the looked-for capital for
investing in industrial foundation.

Returns to source countries on exports of primary products
are niggardly by comparison with the profits made by the
monopoly concessionaires, who are both sellers and processors.
A fair example to take in this connection might be Union
Miniére. In Katanga it operates over 34,000 square kilometres
of concessions, on which it works three copper mines, one
copper and zinc mine, five copper and cobalt mines, an iron
mine and a limestone quarry. All of these are linked by road and
railways owned by the company. First stage concentrates of
copper, cobalt and zinc are milled at six plants. The company
owns four electricity generating plants which work the foundry
at Lubumbashi and the electrolysis plants at Jadotville-Shituru
and Kolwezi-Luilu for the refining of copper and cobalt, of
which it produced 295,236 tons and 9,683 tons respectively in
1962. The bulk of the copper and cobalt, however, go in
concentrate form to the electrolytic refinery of its associate,
Ste Générale Métallurgique de Hoboken, Brussels, which also
treats the radium residues and uranium metals from Katanga,
as well as refining the germanium also coming from the Union
Miniére production. The zinc is sent forward from Katanga in
the form of raw concentrate.

The Katanga output is shipped through the Congo by the
Cie des Chemins de Fer Katanga-Dilolo-Leopoldville, and
overseas by the Cie Maritime Congolaise. Insurance is covered
by the Cie Congolaise d’ Assurances, the Cie Belge d’Assurances
Maritimes or Ste Auxiliaire de la Royale Union Coloniale
Belge. Banking is done through the Ste Belge de Banque, the
Banque du Congo Belge, the Belgian-American Banking
Corporation. Staff is flown in and out by Sabena. Union
Miniére has holdings in all of them, and many others as well.

It is the habit of these great monopolies—and we must
remember that Union Miniére is the world’s third producer of
copper and its first of cobalt—to fix prices to suit their ideas of
profit, subject to certain swings on the world markets, which
frequently they operate and rig. Production at less than full
capacity and the holding back of supplies are tactics that are
often used. Most copper producers have, for the past three
years, been operating at no more than 85 per cent capacity, but
are now returning gradually to fuller output. Following the
strike at Mufulira during 1963, Rhodesian Selection Trust ran
its plant at full capacity in order to replenish its stocks, but
restricted its sales to 85 per cent. At the end of 1963 there was
estimated to be some 300,000 tons a year of idle mine capacity
throughout the world as a result of the voluntary restriction of
output. Stocks accumulated outside the United States, in order
to support prices, were put at 130,000 to 150,000 tons. The
price had been stabilised at around £234 a ton for 1962/63.
Demand for copper having risen, stocks were exhausted by
mid-January 1964 and the price rose on the London Metal
Exchange. Rhodesian producers, however, stepped up their
price to £236, and from the remarks made by Union Miniére’s
chairman it would appear that the Exchange was forced into |
line, even though the producers were reducing their output
cutback to 10 per cent. Despite the strike, and reduced output,
turnover and net profits of Rhodesian Selection Trust were
higher in 1963 than in 1962 and considerably above those of
1960, when prices were higher. Turnover in 1960 was
£31,019,000; in 1962, £46,298,000; and in 1963, £50,931,000.
Profits after tax were £7,600,000 for 1960; £7,735,000 for 1962;
and £8,273,000 for 1963. This was the result of the offloading
of stocks.

We constantly read about the high prices that are earned for
copper, tin, zinc and so forth. What is little understood is that
these are the prices for the commodities on the industrial }
market in their processed forms. ‘The metals leave the countries
of their origin mainly in their primary condition of ores or
concentrates and sometimes in the first stage transformation,
which fetch merely token returns to these countries. The
returns are even more paltry when measured against the values
that are added the moment the materials are placed on board
the transportation carrier at the point of exit; the carrier
usually, as we have seen in the case of Union Miniere, being
related directly or indirectly with the actual producer. The
many more surpluses that accrue in the course of transit from
producing country to the foreign transformation centres and
through the subsequent stages of conversion fall to the con-
cessionary combines and the shipping, transport, banking, \
insurance, manufacturing and selling organisations with which,
in most cases, they are linked. As Victor Perlo dramatically
summarises in American Imperialism, ‘weak countries, without
adequate industry to build ships and airplanes, must pay tolls
to the imperialist transportation monopolies for the goods they
import and export. Countries without adequate financial
resources must pay fees to the centres of finance capital for the
use of banking facilities and for insurance’ (p. 62).

Amounts remaining behind in the producing countries in the
form of wages are sadly fractional. Over 50 per cent of the
Congo’s national income went regularly to European residents
and foreign firms. The rest remained to be distributed over the
various sectors of the economy. It is not surprising that the
territory’s 14 million inhabitants live in the extremest poverty.
In Gabon one-third of the income goes to the non-African
population. Two-fifths of Liberia’s total income accrues to
foreign firms (U.N. Report E/CN.14/246, 7 January 1964).
And when independent African countries attempt to establish
a certain rectification by levelling taxes on company profits,
they draw resentment that is echoed in dire warnings in the
imperialist press that they will stifle foreign investment if they
continue such encroachments upon expatriate rights.

‘Ashanti hit by Ghana tax,’ shouted a paragraph headline in
a London City journal dated 28 January 1964, and set forth
figures to show that Ghana Government taxation had cut
Ashanti Goldfields 1962/63 profits from £1,111,162 to £609,142.
Nevertheless the company was still able to declare a total
dividend of 374 per cent, a fall obviously from the 50 per cent
and over that had been kept up for several previous years, but
still a whacking return on an original capital of £250,000 which
had been built up to its present £3 million from reserves out of
past and current profits. That the company was able to pay the
dividend is proof of the nicely cushioned reserves that have
been accumulated over a period of operations, in addition to
what has been drawn back into capital.

Diamonds are bringing some extra revenue to the West
African countries out of new selling arrangements which are
taking some of the profit that formerly went to CAST (Con-
solidated African Selection Trust) and its De Beers’ principals.
Ghana has its own diamond market and a government market-
-ing board which takes the commission which used to go to
middlemen acting for De Beers. In Sierra Leone CAST profits
were higher, but a service fee paid to the government board
‘under protest’ and higher production costs cut them some-
what. Nevertheless, CAST was able to declare a final dividend
that left the total dividend for the year 1962/63 unchanged at
3s. 6d. on a 5s. share (70 per cent), of which there were
18,198,654 issued and paid up out of 20 million authorised.
This issued capital, amounting to £4,549,663 10s. was achieved
in less than twenty years out of reserves made from an original
capital of £250,000. Furthermore, stocks of diamonds held by
the group at the end of the working year had an estimated value
of £6 million.

Further profits are forced out of Africa in the form of the
inflated cost of finished goods, equipment and services she is
forced to buy from the monopoly sources that extract the prime
materials. This is the big squeeze in which Africa is caught, one
that grew tighter from the eve of the first world war. It was
estimated by United Nations experts that the dependent
countries had to pay $2.5 to $3 billion more for their imports of
manufactured goods in 1947 than they would have had to pay
if price ratios were the same as in 1913. For the period from
1950 to 1961, according to the Food and Agricultural Organisa-
tion of the U.N., the index of returns for primary materials fell
from 97 to 91 (70 for cocoa, coffee and tea), while that for
manufactured goods rose from 86 to 110. For steel, which is an
indispensable commodity on an increasing scale for developing
countries, it reaches the very much higher figure of 134. In
terms of exchange as between primary producing countries and
the exporters of manufactured goods, there has been a decline
in ten years from 113 to 82, to the disadvantage of the former.
The value of Ghana’s exports in 1962 was the same as that for
exports in 1961, but the volume had increased by about six per
cent. The value of imports in 1962 was reduced by 16 per cent
but the volume fell by only 14 per cent. In the Congo Republic
(Brazzaville), while 1962 saw an increase of 77 per cent in
exports over 1961, and imports declined by 15 per cent, the
value of the exports hardly covered half the value of the imports
(E/CN.14/239, Part A, December 1963).

18. The mechanisms
of neo-colonialism

IN order to halt foreign interference in the affairs of developing
countries it is necessary to study, understand, expose and
actively combat neo-colonialism in whatever guise it may
appear. For the methods of neo-colonialists are subtle and
varied. They operate not only in the economic field, but also
in the political, religious, ideological and cultural spheres.

Faced with the militant peoples of the ex-colonial territories
in Asia, Africa, the Caribbean and Latin America, imperialism
simply switches tactics. Without a qualm it dispenses with its
flags, and even with certain of its more hated expatriate officials.
This means, so it claims, that it is ‘giving’ independence to its
former subjects, to be followed by ‘aid’ for their development.
Under cover of such phrases, however, it devises innumerable
ways to accomplish objectives formerly achieved by naked
colonialism. It is this sum total of these modern attempts to
perpetuate colonialism while at the same time talking about
‘freedom’, which has come to be known as neo-colonialism.

Foremost among the neo-colonialists is the United States,
which has long exercised its power in Latin America. Fumblingly
at first she turned towards Europe, and then with more cer-
tainty after world war two when most countries of that con-
tinent were indebted to her. Since then, with methodical
thoroughness and touching attention to detail, the Pentagon
set about consolidating its ascendancy, evidence of which can
be seen all around the world.

Who really rules in such places as Great Britain, West
Germany, Japan, Spain, Portugal or Italy? If General de
Gaulle is ‘defecting’ from U.S. monopoly control, what inter-
pretation can be placed on his ‘experiments’ in the Sahara
desert, his paratroopers in Gabon, or his trips to Cambodia and
Latin America?

Lurking behind such questions are the extended tentacles
of the Wall Street octopus. And its suction cups and muscular
strength are provided by a phenomenon dubbed “The Invisible
Government’, arising from Wall Street’s connection with the
Pentagon and various intelligence services. I quote:

‘The Invisible Government . . . is a loose amorphous
grouping of individuals and agencies drawn from many parts
of the visible government. It is not limited to the Central
Intelligence Agency, although the CIA is at its heart. Nor
is it confined to the nine other agencies which comprise
what is known as the intelligence community: the National
Security Council, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the
National Security Agency, Army Intelligence, Navy Intelli-
gence and Research, the Atomic Energy Commission and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

The Invisible Government includes also many other units
and agencies, as well as individuals, that appear outwardly
to be a normal part of the conventional government. It even
encompasses business firms and institutions that are
seemingly private.

To an extent that is only beginning to be perceived, this
shadow government is shaping the lives of 190,000,000
Americans. An informed citizen might come to suspect that
the foreign policy of the United States often works publicly
in one direction and secretly through the Invisible Govern-
ment in just the opposite direction.

This Invisible Government is a relatively new institution.
It came into being as a result of two related factors: the rise
of the United States after World War II to a position of pre-
eminent world power, and the challenge to that power by
Soviet Communism. ...

By 1964 the intelligence network had grown into a
massive hidden apparatus, secretly employing about 200,000
persons and spending billions of dollars a year.’*

Here, from the very citadel of neo-colonialism, is a descrip-
tion of the apparatus which now directs all other Western
intelligence set-ups either by persuasion or by force. Results
were achieved in Algeria during the April 1961 plot of anti-
de Gaulle generals; as also in Guatemala, Iraq, Iran, Suez and
the famous U-2 spy intrusion of Soviet air space which wrecked
the approaching Summit, then in West Germany and again in
East Germany in the riots of 1953, in Hungary’s abortive crisis
of 1959, Poland’s of September 1956, and in Korea, Burma,
Formosa, Laos, Cambodia and South Vietnam; they are
evident in the trouble in Congo (Leopoldville) which began
with Lumumba’s murder, and continues till now; in events
in Cuba, Turkey, Cyprus, Greece, and in other places too
numerous to catalogue completely.

And with what aim have these innumerable incidents
occurred? The general objective has been mentioned: to
achieve colonialism in fact while preaching independence.

On the economic front, a strong factor favouring Western
monopolies and acting against the developing world is inter-
national capital’s control of the world market, as well as of
the prices of commodities bought and sold there. From 1951
to 1961, without taking oil into consideration, the general
level of prices for primary products fell by 33-1 per cent, while
prices of manufactured goods rose 3-5 per cent (within which,
machinery and equipment prices rose 31-3 per cent). In that
same decade this caused a loss to the Asian, African and Latin
American countries, using 1951 prices as a basis, of some
$41,400 million. In the same period, while the volume of
exports from these countries rose, their earnings in foreign
exchange from such exports decreased.

Another technique of neo-colonialism is the use of high rates
of interest. Figures from the World Bank for 1962 showed that

* The Invisible Government, David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, Random
House, New York, 1964.

seventy-one Asian, African and Latin American countries owed
foreign debts of some $27,000 million, on which they paid in
interest and service charges some $5,000 million. Since then,
such foreign debts have been estimated as more than £30,000
million in these areas. In 1961, the interest rates on almost
three-quarters of the loans offered by the major imperialist
powers amounted to more than five per cent, in some cases up
to seven or eight per cent, while the call-in periods of such
loans have been burdensomely short.

While capital worth $30,000 million was exported.to some
fifty-six developing countries between 1956 and 1962, it is
estimated that interest and profit alone extracted on this sum
from the debtor countries amounted to more than £15,000
million. This method of penetration by economic aid recently
soared into prominence when a number of countries began
rejecting it. Ceylon, Indonesia and Cambodia are among those
who turned it down. Such ‘aid’ is estimated on the annual
average to have amounted to $2,600 million between 1951 and
1955; $4,007 million between 1956 and 1959, and $6,000
million between 1960 and 1962. But the average sums taken
out of the aided countries by such donors in a sample year,
1961, are estimated to amount to $5,000 million in profits,
$1,000 million in interest, and $5,800 million from non-
equivalent exchange, or a total of $11,800 million extracted
against $6,000 million put in. Thus, ‘aid’ turns out to be
another means of exploitation, a modern method of capital
export under a more cosmetic name.

Still another neo-colonialist trap on the economic front has
come to be known as ‘multilateral aid’ through international
organisations: the International Monetary Fund, the Inter-
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development (known as
the World Bank), the International Finance Corporation and
the International Development Association are examples, all,
significantly, having U.S. capital as their major backing. These
agencies have the habit of forcing would-be borrowers to
submit to various offensive conditions, such as supplying
information about their economies, submitting their policy
and plans to review by the World Bank and accepting agency
supervision of their use of loans. As for the alleged develop-
ment, between 1960 and mid-1963 the International Develop-
ment Association promised a total of $500 million to
applicants, out of which only $70 million were actually
received.

In more recent years, as pointed out by Monitor in The
Times, 1 July 1965, there has been a substantial increase in
communist technical and economic aid activities in developing
countries. During 1964 the total amount of assistance offered
was approximately £600 million. This was almost a third of
the total communist aid given during the previous decade. The
Middle East received about 40 per cent of the total, Asia 36 per
cent, Africa 22 per cent and Latin America the rest.

Increased Chinese activity was responsible to some extent
for the larger amount of aid offered in 1964, though China
contributed only a quarter of the total aid committed; the
Soviet Union provided a half, and the East European countries
a quarter.

Although aid from socialist countries still falls far short of
that offered from the west, it is often more impressive, since
it is swift and flexible, and interest rates on communist loans
are only about two per cent compared with five to six per cent
charged on loans from western countries.

Nor is the whole story of ‘aid’ contained in figures, for there
are conditions which hedge it around: the conclusion of com-
merce and navigation treaties; agreements for economic
co-operation; the right to meddle in internal finances, including
currency and foreign exchange, to lower trade barriers in
favour of the donor country’s goods and capital; to protect
the interests of private investments; determination of how the
funds are to be used; forcing the recipient to set up counterpart
funds; to supply raw materials to the donor; and use of such
funds—a majority of it, in fact—to buy goods from the donor
nation. These conditions apply to industry, commerce, agri-
culture, shipping and insurance, apart from others which are
political and military.

So-called ‘invisible trade’ furnishes the Western monopolies
with yet another means of economic penetration. Over 90 per
cent of world ocean shipping is controlled by the imperialist
countries. They control shipping rates and, between 1951 and
1961, they increased them some five times in a total rise of
about 60 per cent, the upward trend continuing. Thus, net
annual freight expenses incurred by Asia, Africa and Latin
America amount to no less than an estimated $1,600 million.
This is over and above all other profits and interest payments.
As for insurance payments, in 1961 alone these amounted to
an unfavourable balance in Asia, Africa and Latin America of
some additional $370 million.

Having waded through all this, however, we have begun to
understand only the basic methods of neo-colonialism. The
full extent of its inventiveness is far from exhausted.

In the labour field, for example, imperialism operates
through labour arms like the Social Democratic parties of
Europe led by the British Labour Party, and through such
instruments as the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions (ICFTU), now apparently being superseded by the
New York Africa-American Labour Centre (AALC) under
AFL-CIO chief George Meany and the well-known CIA man
in labour’s top echelons, Irving Brown.

In 1945, out of the euphoria of anti-fascist victory, the
World Federation of Trade Unions (WF TU) had been formed,
including all world labour except the U.S. American Federa-
tion of Labor (AFL). By 1949, however, led by the British
Trade Union Congress (TUC), a number of pro-imperialist
labour bodies in the West broke away from the WFTU over
the issue of anti-colonialist liberation, and set up the ICFTU.

For ten years it continued under British TUC leadership.
Its record in Africa, Asia and Latin America could gratify
only the big international monopolies which were extracting
super-profits from those areas.

In 1959, at Brussels, the United States AFL-CIO union
centre fought for and won control of the ICFTU Executive
Board. From then on a flood of typewriters, mimeograph
machines, cars, supplies, buildings, salaries and, so it is sfill
averred, outright bribes for labour leaders in various parts
of the developing world rapidly linked ICFTU in the minds
of the rank and file with the CIA. To such an extent did its
prestige suffer under these American bosses that, in 1964,
the AFL-CIO brains felt it necessary to establish a fresh
outfit. They set up the AALC in New York right across the
river from the United Nations.

‘As a steadfast champion of national independence, democ-
racy and social justice’, unblushingly stated the April 1965
Bulletin put out by this Centre, ‘the AFL-CIO will strengthen
its efforts to assist the advancement of the economic conditions
of the African peoples. Toward this end, steps have been
taken to expand assistance to the African free trade unions by
organising the African-American Labour Centre. Such assist-
ance will help African labour play a vital role in the economic
and democratic upbuilding of their countries.’

The March issue of this Bulletin, however, gave the game
away: ‘In mobilising capital resources for investment in
Workers Education, Vocational Training, Co-operatives,
Health Clinics and Housing, the Centre will work with both
private and public institutions. It will also encourage labour-
management co-operation to expand American capital investment
in the African nations.’ The italics are mine. Could anything
be plainer?

Following a pattern previously set by the ICFTU, it has
already started classes: one for drivers and mechanics in
Nigeria, one in tailoring in Kenya. Labour scholarships are
being offered to Africans who want to study trade unionism
in—of all places—Austria, ostensibly by the Austrian unions.
Elsewhere, labour, organised into political parties of which the
British Labour Party is a leading and typical example, has
shown a similar aptitude for encouraging ‘Labour-management
co-operation to expand . . . capital investment in African
nations.’

But as the struggle sharpens, even these measures of neo-
colonialism are proving too mild. So Africa, Asia and Latin
America have begun to experience a round of coups d’état
or would-be coups, together with a series of political assassina-
tions which have destroyed in their political primes some of
the newly emerging nations’ best leaders. To ensure success
in these endeavours, the imperialists have made widespread
and wily use of ideological and cultural weapons in the form
of intrigues, manoeuvres and slander campaigns.

Some of these methods used by neo-colonialists to slip past
our guard must now be examined. The first is retention by
the departing colonialists of various kinds of privileges which
infringe on our sovereighty: that of setting up military bases
or stationing troops in former colonies and the supplying of
‘advisers’ of one sort or another. Sometimes a number of
‘rights’ are demanded: land concessions, prospecting rights for
minerals and/or oil; the ‘right’ to collect customs, to carry out
administration, to issue paper money; to be exempt from
customs duties and/or taxes for expatriate enterprises; and,
above all, the ‘right’ to provide ‘aid’. Also demanded and
granted are privileges in the cultural field; that Western
information services be exclusive; and that those from socialist
countries be excluded.

Even the cinema stories of fabulous Hollywood are loaded.
One has only to listen to the cheers of an African audience
as Hollywood’s heroes slaughter red Indians or Asiatics to
understand the effectiveness of this weapon. For, in the
developing continents, where the colonialist heritage has left
a vast majority still illiterate, even the smallest child gets the
message contained in the blood and thunder stories emanating
from California. And along with murder and the Wild West
goes an incessant barrage of anti-socialist propaganda, in which
the trade union man, the revolutionary, or the man of dark skinis
generally cast as the villain, while the policeman, the gum-shoe,
the Federal agent—in a word, the CIA-type spy—is ever the
hero. Here, truly, is the ideological under-belly of those political
murders which so often use local people as their instruments.

While Hollywood takes care of fiction, the enormous
monopoly press, together with the outflow of slick, clever,
expensive magazines, attends to what it chooses to call ‘news’.
Within separate countries, one or two news agencies contr: rl
the news handouts, so that a deadly uniformity is achieved,
regardless of the number of separate newspapers or magazines;
while internationally, the financial preponderance of the-United
States is felt more and more through its foreign correspondents
and offices abroad, as well as through its influence over inter-
national capitalist journalism. Under this guise, a flood of
anti-liberation propaganda emanates from the capital cities of
the West, directed against China, Vietnam, Indonesia, Algeria,
Ghana and all countries which hack out their own independent
path to freedom. Prejudice is rife. For example, wherever there
is armed struggle against the forces of reaction, the nationalists
are referred to as rebels, terrorists, or frequently ‘communist
terrorists’!

Perhaps one of the most insidious methods of the neo-
colonialists is evangelism. Following the liberation movement
there has been a veritable riptide of religious sects, the over-
whelming majority of them American. Typical of these are
Jehovah’s Witnesses who recently created trouble in certain
developing countries by busily teaching their citizens not to
salute the new national flags. ‘Religion’ was too thin to smother
the outcry that arose against this activity, and a temporary lull
followed. But the number of evangelists continues to grow.

Yet even evangelism and the cinema are only two twigs on
a much bigger tree. Dating from the end of 1961, the U.S.
has actively developed a huge ideological plan for invading the
so-called Third World, utilising all its facilities from press and
radio to Peace Corps.

During 1962 and 1963 a number of international conferences
to this end were held in several places, such as Nicosia in
Cyprus, San José in Costa Rica, and Lagos in Nigeria. Parti-
cipants included the CIA, the U.S. Information Agency
(USIA), the Pentagon, the International Development Agency,
the Peace Corps and others. Programmes were drawn up
which included the systematic use of U.S. citizens abroad in
virtual intelligence activities and propaganda work. Methods
of recruiting political agents and of forcing ‘alliances’ with the
U.S.A. were worked out. At the centre of its programmes lay
the demand for an absolute U.S. monopoly in the field of
propaganda, as well as for counteracting any independent
efforts by developing states in the realm of information.

The United States sought, and still seeks, with considerable
success, to co-ordinate on the basis of its own strategy the
propaganda activities of all Western countries. In October
1961, a conference of NATO countries was held in Rome to
discuss problems of psychological warfare. It appealed for the
organisation of combined ideological operations in Afro-Asian
countries by all participants.

In May and June 1962 a seminar was convened by the U.S.
in Vienna on ideological warfare. It adopted a secret decision
to engage in a propaganda offensive against the developing
countries along lines laid down by the U.S.A. It was agreed
that NATO propaganda agencies would, in practice if not in
the public eye, keep in close contact with U.S. Embassies in
their respective countries.

Among instruments of such Western psychological warfare
are numbered the intelligence agencies of Western countries
headed by those of the United States ‘Invisible Government’.
But most significant among them all are Moral Re-Armament
(MRA), the Peace Corps and the United States Information
Agency (USIA).

Moral Re-Armament is an organisation founded in 1938 by
the American, Frank Buchman. In the last days before the
second world war, it advocated the appeasement of Hitler,
often extolling Himmler, the Gestapo chief. In Africa, MRA
incursions began at the end of World War II. Against the big
anti-colonial upsurge that followed victory in 1945, MRA
spent millions advocating collaboration between the forces
oppressing the African peoples and those same peoples. It is
not without significance that Moise Tshombe and Joseph
Kasavubu of Congo (Leopoldville) are both MRA supporters.
George Seldes, in his book One Thousand Americans, charac-
terised MRA as a fascist organisation ‘subsidised by . . .
Fascists, and with a long record of collaboration with Fascists
the world over... .’ This description is supported by the active
participation in MRA of people like General Carpentier,
former commander of NATO land forces, and General Ho
Ying-chin, one of Chiang Kai-shek’s top generals. To cap thtfis,
several newspapers, some of them in the Western world, have
claimed that MRA is actually subsidised by the CIA. 

When MRA’s influence began to fail, some new instrument
to cover the ideological arena was desired. It came in the
establishment of the American Peace Corps in 1961 by
President John Kennedy, with Sargent Shriver, Jr., his
brother-in-law, in charge. Shriver, a millionaire who made his
pile in land speculation in Chicago, was also known as the
friend, confidant and co-worker of the former head of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Allen Dulles. These two had
worked together in both the Office of Strategic Services, U.S.
war-time intelligence agency, and in the CIA.

Shriver’s record makes a mockery of President Kennedy’s
alleged instruction to Shriver to ‘keep the CIA out of the
Peace Corps’. So does the fact that, although the Peace Corps
is advertised as a voluntary organisation, all its members are
carefully screened by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI).

Since its creation in 1961, members of the Peace Corps have
been exposed and expelled from many African, Middle
Eastern and Asian countries for acts of subversion or prejudice.
Indonesia, Tanzania, the Philippines, and even pro-West
countries like Turkey and Iran, have complained of its
activities.

However, perhaps the chief executor of U.S. psychological
warfare is the United States Information Agency (USIA).
Even for the wealthiest nation on earth, the U.S. lavishes an
unusual amount of men, materials and money on this vehicle
for its neo-colonial aims.

The USIA is staffed by some 12,000 persons to the tune of
more than $130 million a year. It has more than seventy
editorial staffs working on publications abroad. Of its network
comprising 110 radio stations, 60 are outside the U.S. Pro-
grammes are broadcast for Africa by American stations in
Morocco, Eritrea, Liberia, Crete, and Barcelona, Spain, as well
as from off-shore stations on American ships. In Africa alone,
the USIA transmits about thirty territorial and national radio
programmes whose content glorifies the U.S. while attempting
to discredit countries with an independent foreign policy.

The USIA boasts more than 120 branches in about 100
countries, 50 of which are in Africa alone. It has 250 centres
in foreign countries, each of which is usually associated with a
library. It employs about 200 cinemas and 8,000 projectors
which draw upon its nearly 300 film libraries.

This agency is directed by a central body which operates in
the name of the U.S. President, planning and co-ordinating its
activities in close touch with the Pentagon, CIA and other
Cold War agencies, including even armed forces intelligence
centres.

In developing countries, the USIA actively tries to prevent
expansion of national media of information so as itself to
capture the market-place of ideas. It spends huge sums for
publication and distribution of about sixty newspapers and
magazines in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

The American government backs the USIA through direct
pressures on developing nations. To ensure its agency a
complete monopoly in propaganda, for instance, many agree-
ments for economic co-operation offered by the U.S. include a
demand that Americans be granted preferential rights to dis-
seminate information. At the same time, in trying to close the
new nations to other sources of information, it employs other
pressures. For instance, after agreeing to set up USIJA in-
formation centres in their countries, both Togo and Congo
(Leopoldville) originally hoped to follow a non-aligned path
and permit Russian information centres as a balance. But
Washington threatened to stop all aid, thereby forcing these
two countries to renounce their plan.

Unbiassed studies of the USIA by such authorities as
Dr R. Holt of Princeton University, Retired Colonel R. Van
de Velde, former intelligence agents Murril Dayer, Wilson
Dizard and others, have all called attention to the close ties
between this agency and U.S. Intelligence. For example,
Deputy Director Donald M. Wilson was a political intelligence
agent in the U.S. Army. Assistant Director for Europe, Joseph
Philips, was a successful espionage agent in several Eastern
European countries.

Some USIA duties further expose its nature as a top
intelligence arm of the U.S. imperialists. In the first place, it
is expected to analyse the situation in each country, making
recommendations to its Embassy, thereby to its Government,
about changes that can tip the local balance in U.S. favour.
Secondly, it organises networks of monitors for radio broad-
casts and telephone conversations, while recruiting informers
from government offices. It also hires people to distribute U.S.
propaganda. Thirdly, it collects secret information with special
reference to defence and economy, as a means of eliminating
its international military and economic competitors. Fourthly,
it buys its way into local publications to influence their
policies, of which Latin America furnishes numerous examples.
It has been active in bribing public figures, for example in
Kenya and Tunisia. Finally, it finances, directs and often
supplies with arms all anti-neutralist forces in the developing
countries, witness Tshombe in Congo (Leopoldville) and Pak
Hung Ji in South Korea. In a word, with virtually unlimited
finances, there seems no bounds to its inventiveness in sub-
version.

One of the most recent developments in neo-colonialist
strategy is the suggested establishment of a Businessmen Corps
which will, like the Peace Corps, act in developing countries.
In an article on ‘U.S. Intelligence and the Monopolies’ in
International Affairs (Moscow, January 1965), V. Chernyavsky
writes: ‘There can hardly be any doubt that this Corps is a
new U.S. intelligence organisation created on the initiative of
the American monopolies to use Big Business for espionage’.

It is by no means unusual for U.S. Intelligence to set up its
own business firms which are merely thinly disguised espionage
centres. For example, according to Chernyavsky, the C.I.A.
has set up a firm in Taiwan known as Western Enterprises Inc.
Under this cover it sends spies and saboteurs to South China.
The New Asia Trading Company, a CIA firm in India, has
also helped to camouflage U.S. intelligence agents operating in
South-east Asia.

Such is the catalogue of neo-colonialism’s activities and
methods in our time. Upon reading it, the faint-hearted might
come to feel that they must give up in despair before such an
array of apparent power and seemingly inexhaustible resources.

Fortunately, however, history furnishes innumerable proofs
of one of its own major laws: that the budding future is always
stronger than the withering past. This has been amply demon-
strated during every major revolution throughout history.

The American Revolution of 1776 struggled through to
victory over a tangle of inefficiency, mismanagement, cor-
ruption, outright subversion and counter-revolution the like
of which has been repeated to some degree in every subsequent
revolution to date.

The Russian Revolution during the period of Intervention,
1917 to 1922, appeared to be dying on its feet. The Chinese
Revolution at one time was forced to pull out of its existing
bases, lock stock and barrel, and make the unprecedented Long
March; yet it triumphed. Imperialist white mercenaries who
dropped so confidently out of the skies on Stanleyville after a
plane trip from Ascension Island thought that their job would
be ‘duck soup’. Yet, till now, the nationalist forces of Congo
(Leopoldville) continue to fight their way forward. They do
not talk of zf they will win, but only of when.

Asia provides a further example of the strength of a
people’s will to determine their own future. In South Vietnam
‘special warfare’ is being fought to hold back the tide of
revolutionary change. ‘Special warfare’ is a concept of
General Maxwell Taylor and a military extension of the creed
of John Foster Dulles: let Asians fight Asians. Briefly, the
technique is for the foreign power to supply the money, air-
craft, military equipment of all kinds, and the strategic and
tactical command from a General Staff down to officer
‘advisers’, while the troops of the puppet government bear
the brunt of the fighting. Yet in spite of bombing raids and
the immense build-up of foreign strength in the area, the
people of both North and South Vietnam are proving to be
unconquerable.

In other parts of Asia, in Cambodia, Laos, Indonesia, and
now the Philippines, Thailand and Burma, the peoples of
ex-colonial countries have stood firm and are winning battles
against the allegedly superior imperialist enemy. In Latin
America, despite ‘final’ punitive expeditions, the growing
armed insurrections in Colombia, Venezuela and other
countries continue to consolidate gains.

In Africa, we in Ghana have withstood all efforts by im-
perialism and its agents; Tanzania has nipped subversive plots
in the bud, as have Brazzaville, Uganda and Kenya. The
struggle rages back and forth. The surging popular forces
may still be hampered by colonialist legacies, but nonetheless
they advance inexorably.

All these examples prove beyond doubt that neo-colonialism
is not a sign of imperialism’s strength but rather of its last
hideous gasp. It testifies to its inability to rule any longer by
old methods. Independence is a luxury it can no longer afford
to permit its subject peoples, so that even what it claims to have
‘given’ it now seeks to take away.

This means that neo-colonialism can and will be defeated.
How can this be done?

Thus far, all the methods of neo-colonialists have pointed
in one direction, the ancient, accepted one of all minority
ruling classes throughout history—divide and rule.

Quite obviously, therefore, unity is the first requisite for
destroying neo-colonialism. Primary and basic is the need for
an all-union government on the much divided continent of
Africa. Along with that, a strengthening of the Afro-Asian
Solidarity Organisation and the spirit of Bandung is already
under way. To it, we must seek the adherence on an increas-
ingly formal basis of our Latin American brothers.

Furthermore, all these liberatory forces have, on all major
issues and at every possible instance, the support of the
growing socialist sector of the world.

Finally, we must encourage and utilise to the full those still
all too few yet growing instances of support for liberation and
anti-colonialism inside the imperialist world itself.

To carry out such a political programme, we must all back
it with national plans designed to strengthen ourselves as
independent nations. An external condition for such indepen-
dent development is neutrality or political non-alignment. This
has been expressed in two conferences of Non-Aligned Nations
during the recent past, the last of which, in Cairo in 1964,
clearly and inevitably showed itself at one with the rising forces
of liberation and human dignity.

And the preconditions for all this, to which lip service is
often paid but activity seldom directed, is to develop ideo-
logical clarity among the anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist, pro-
liberation masses of our continents. They, and they alone,
make, maintain or break revolutions.

With the utmost speed, neo-colonialism must be analysed in
clear and simple terms for the full mass understanding by the
surging organisations of the African peoples. The All-African
Trade Union Federation (AATUF) has already made a start
in this direction, while the Pan-African Youth Movement,
the women, journalists, farmers and others are not far behind.
Bolstered with ideological clarity, these organisations, closely
linked with the ruling parties where liberatory forces are in
power, will prove that neo-colonialism is the symptom of
imperialism’s weakness and that it is defeatable. For, when
all is said and done, it is the so-called little man, the bent-
backed, exploited, malnourished, blood-covered fighter for
independence who decides. And he invariably decides for
freedom.

Conclusion

In the Introduction I attempted to set out the dilemma now
facing the world. The conflict between rich and poor in the
second half of the nineteenth century and the first half of the
twentieth, which was fought out between the rich and the poor
in the developed nations of the world ended in a compromise.
Capitalism as a system disappeared from large areas of the
world, but where socialism was established it was in its less
developed rather than its more developed parts and, in fact, the
revolt against capitalism had its greatest successes in those areas
where early neo-colonialism had been most actively practised.
In the industrially more developed countries, capitalism, far
from disappearing, became infinitely stronger. This strength
was only achieved by the sacrifice of two principles which had
inspired early capitalism, namely the subjugation of the work-
ing classes within each individual country and the exclusion of
the State from any say in the control of capitalist enterprise.

By abandoning these two principles and substituting for them
‘welfare states’ based on high working-class living standards
and on a State-regulated capitalism at home, the developed
countries succeeded in exporting their internal problem and
transferring the conflict between rich and poor from the
national to the international stage.

Marx had argued that the development of capitalism would
produce a crisis within each individual capitalist State because
within each State the gap between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’
would widen to a point where a conflict was inevitable and that
it would be the capitalists who would be defeated. The basis of
his argument is not invalidated by the fact that the conflict,
which he had predicted as a national one, did not everywhere
take place on a national scale but has been transferred instead
to the world stage. World capitalism has postponed its crisis but
only at the cost of transforming it into an international crisis.
The danger is now not civil war within individual States pro-
voked by intolerable conditions within those States, but inter-
national war provoked ultimately by the misery of the majority
of mankind who daily grow poorer and poorer.

When Africa becomes economically free and_ politically
united, the monopolists will come face to face with their own
working class in their own countries, and a new struggle will
arise within which the liquidation and collapse of imperialism
will be complete.

As this book has attempted to show, in the same way as the
internal crisis of capitalism within the developed world arose
through the uncontrolled action of national capital, so a greater
crisis is being provoked today by similar uncontrolled action
of international capitalism in the developing parts of the world.
Before the problem can be solved it must at least be under-
stood. It cannot be resolved merely by pretending that neo-
colonialism does not exist. It must be realised that the methods
at present employed to solve the problem of world poverty are
not likely to yield any result other than to extend the crisis.

Speaking in 1951, the then President of the United States,
Mr Truman, said, “The only kind of war we seek is the good old
fight against man’s ancient enemies . . . poverty, disease, hunger
and illiteracy.’ Sentiments of a similar nature have been
re-echoed by all political leaders in the developed world but the
stark fact remains: whatever wars may have been won since
1951, none of them is the war against poverty, disease, hunger
and illiteracy. However little other types of war have been
deliberately sought, they are the only ones which have been
waged. Nothing is gained by assuming that those who express
such views are insincere. The position of the leaders of the
developed capitalist countries of the world arc, in relation to the
great neo-colonialist international financial combines, very
similar to that which Lord Macaulay described as existing
between the directors of the East India Company and their
agent, Warren Hastings, who, in the eighteenth century,
engaged in the wholesale plunder of India. Macaulay wrote:

“The Directors, it is true, never enjoined or applauded any
crime. Far from it. Whoever examines their letters written at
the time will find there are many just and humane sentiments,
many excellent precepts, in short, an admirable code of
political ethics. But each exultation is modified or nullified by
a demand for money. . . . We Ipy no means accuse or suspect
those who framed these dispatches of hypocrisy. It is prob-
able that, written 15,000 miles from the place where their
orders were to be carried into effect, they never perceived the
gross inconsistency of which they were guilty. But the incon-
sistency was at once manifest to their lieutenant in Calcutta.
... Hastings saw that it was absolutely necessary for him to
disregard either the moral discourses or the pecuniary requi-
sitions of his employers. Being forced to disobey them in
something, he had to consider what kind of disobedience
they would most readily pardon; and he correctly judged that
the safest course would be to neglect the sermons and to find
the rupees.’

Today the need both to maintain a welfare state, i.e. a
parasite State at home, and to support a huge and ever-growing
burden of armament costs makes it absolutely essential for
developed capitalist countries to secure the maximum return in
profit from such parts of the international financial complex as
they control. However much private capitalism is exhorted to
bring about rapid development and a rising standard of living
in the less developed areas of the world, those who manipulate
the system realise the inconsistency between doing this and
producing at the same time the funds necessary to maintain the
sinews of war and the welfare state at home. They know when
it comes to the issue they will be excused if they fail to provide
for a world-wide rise in the standard of living. They know they
will never be forgiven if they betray the system and produce a
crisis at home which either destroys the affluent State or inter-
feres with its military preparedness.

Appeals to capitalism to work out a cure for the division of
the world into rich and poor are likely to have no better result
than the appeals of the Directors of the East India Company to
Warren Hastings to ensure social justice in India. Faced with a
choice, capitalism, like Hastings, will come down on the side
of exploitation.

Is there then no method of avoiding the inevitable world
conflict occasioned by an international class war? To accept
that world conflict is inevitable is to reject any belief in
co-existence or in the policy of non-alignment as practised at
present by many of the countries attempting to escape from
neo-colonialism. A way out is possible.

To start with, for the first time in human history the potential
material resources of the world are so great that there is no need
for there to be rich and poor. It is only the organisation to
deploy these potential resources that is lacking. Effective world
pressure can force such a redeployment, but world pressure is
not exercised by appeals, however eloquent, or by arguments,
however convincing. It is only achieved by deeds. It is neces-
sary to secure a world realignment so that those who are at the
moment the helpless victims of a system will be able in the
future to exert a counter pressure. Such counter pressures do
not lead to war. On the contrary, it is often their absence which
constitutes the threat to peace.

A parallel can be drawn with the methods by which direct
colonialism was ended. No imperial power has ever granted
independence to a colony unless the forces were such that no
other course was possible, and there are many instances where
independence was only achieved by a war of liberation, but
there are many other instances when no such war occurred.
The very organisation of the forces of independence within the
colony was sufficient to convince the imperial power that
resistance to independence would be impossible or that the
political and economic consequences of a colonial war out-
weighed any advantage to be gained by retaining the colony.

In the earlier chapters of this book I have set out the argu-
ment for African unity and have explained how this unity
would destroy neo-colonialism in Africa. In later chapters I
have explained how strong is the world position of those who
profit from neo-colonialism. Nevertheless, African unity is
something which is within the grasp of the African people.
The foreign firms who exploit our resources long ago saw the
strength to be gained from acting on a Pan-African scale. By
means of interlocking directorships, cross-shareholdings and
other devices, groups of apparently different companies have
formed, in fact, one enormous capitalist monopoly. The only
effective way to challenge this economic empire and to recover
possession of our heritage, is for us also to act on a Pan-
African basis, through a Union Government.

No one would suggest that if all the peoples of Africa com-
bined to establish their unity their decision could be revoked
by the forces of neo-colonialism. On the contrary, faced with a
new situation, those who practise neo-colonialism would adjust
themselves to this new balance of world forces in exactly the
same way as the capitalist world has in the past adjusted itself
to any other change in the balance of power.

The danger to world peace springs not from the action of
those who seek to end neo-colonialism but from the inaction of
those who allow it to continue. To argue that a third world war
is not inevitable is one thing, to suppose that it can be avoided
by shutting our eyes to the development of a situation likely to
produce it is quite another matter.

If world war is not to occur it must be prevented by positive
action. This positive action is within the power of the peoples
of those areas of the world which now suffer under neo-
colonialism but it is only within their power if they act at once,
with resolution and in unity.

Bibliography

Aaronovitch, Sam, Monopoly: a study of British Monopoly
Capitalism, Lawrence & Wishart, London, 1955

African-American Labour Centre (AALC), Bulletins, March
and April, 1965

Chernyavsky, V., United States Intelligence and the Monopolies,
International Affairs, Moscow, January, 1965

Clausewitz, Vom Krieg, 1832

Cole, Monica Mary, South Africa, Methuen, London, 1961

Coston, Henry, L’ Europe des Banquiers, Collection ‘Documents
et Témoinages’, La Librairie Frangaise, 1963

Courteney, Frederic Charles, Economic Aid to Under-developed
Countries, Oxford University Press, London, 1961

Department of Economics, The Economics of African Unity,
University of Ghana, 1964

Dizard, Wilson P., The Strategy of Truth: the Story of the
United States Information Service, Public Affairs Press,
1961

Dutt, Rajani Palme, British Colonial Policy and Neo-
colonialist Rivalries, International Affairs, Moscow, April,
1965

Hilferding, Rudolf, Marx Studien, Volume 3: Das Finanz-
kapital, Vienna, 1910

Hobson, J. A., Imperialism, London, 1902

Holt, Robert T., and Van de Velde, Robert, W., Strategic
Psychological Operations and American Foreign Policy,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1960

Jeanneney Report, La Politique de Cooperation avec les Pays
en Voie de Développement, 1964

Joye, Pierre, and Lewin, Rosine, Les Trusts au Congo, Société
Populaire d’Editions, Brussels, 1961

Lenin, Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism, 1916

Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Warren Hastings, Edinburgh
Review, October, 1841

Machyo, B. Chango, Aid and Neo-colonialism, Africania Study
Group, 1964

Marx, Capttal, 1867

Nkrumah, Kwame, Africa Must Unite, Heinemann, London,
1963

Park, L. C. and F. W., The Anatomy of Big Business, Toronto
Progress Books, 1962

Perlo, Victor, American Imperialism, International Publishers,
New York, 1951

Perlo, Victor, The Empire of High Finance, International
Publishers, New York, 1957

Report of the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa, Part 3: Industrial Growth in Africa, New York,
1963

Reports of the Economic Commission for Africa Industrial
Co-ordination Missions to different regions of Africa

Seldes, George, One Thousand Americans, Boni & Gaer, New
York, 1947

Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1962

United Nations Economic Commission for Africa’s Standing
Committee for Trade, Background Paper on the Estab-
lishment of an African Common Market, 13 October
1963

United Nations Report, E/CN 14/239, Part A, December,
1963

United Nations Report, E/CN 14/246, 7 January 1964

United Nations Statistical Year Book, 1945, 1959, 1960

Wilson, Harold, The War on World Poverty: an Appeal to the
Conscience of Mankind, Gollancz, London, 1953

Wise, David, and Ross, Thomas B., The Invisible Government,
Random House, New York, 1964

Reference is made to the following company reports:

Anglo American Corporation, AGM, 1962

Anglo-Transvaal Consolidated Investment Company, Annual
Address, 6 December 1963

Consolidated African Gold Fields of South Africa Corporation,
AGM, 30 June 1961

Grangesberg, Annual Report, 18 May 1962

Harmony Gold Mining Co. Ltd., AGM, June, 1961

Rand Selection Corporation Ltd., 71st AGM, 26 February
1963

M. Samuel & Co., AGM, 1963

Société Générale, Report for 1962

Reference passim to the following newspapers and periodicals:

The Economist, Europe (France) Outremer (November 1961),
Nouvel Observateur, The Financtal Times, Fortune, Inter-
national Affairs, Le Monde, Modern Government (March/
April, 1962), New Commonwealth, The Sunday Times,
Wall Street Journal, West Africa
